Received January 1, 2019, accepted January 13, 2019, date of publication February 13, 2019, date of current version March 25, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2019.2899177
Assessing the Profitability of Timely Opening
Range Breakout on Index Futures Markets
YI-CHENG TSAI1,2, MU-EN WU
 3, JIA-HAO SYU 1,4, CHIN-LAUNG LEI 2,
CHUNG-SHU WU 5, JAN-MING HO 1,6, AND CHUAN-JU WANG
 6
1Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan
2Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
3Department of Information and Finance Management, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei 10608, Taiwan
4Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
5Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research, Taipei 10672, Taiwan
6Research Center of Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan
Corresponding author: Chuan-Ju Wang (cjwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw)
ABSTRACT This paper presents a timely open range breakout (TORB) strategies for index futures market
trading via using one-minute intraday data. We observe that the trading volumes and ﬂuctuations in returns
on each one-minute interval of trading hours in the futures markets reach their peaks at the opening and
closing of the underlying stock markets. With these observations, we align the active hours of an index
futures market with its underlying stock market and test the proposed TORB strategies on the DJIA, S&P
500, NASDAQ, HSI, and TAIEX index futures from 2003 to 2013. In the experiments, the proposed strategy
achieves over 8% annual returns with p-values less than 3% in all of the ﬁve markets; the best performance,
20.28% annual returns at a p-value of 3.1×10−5%, is reached in the TAIEX. For each market, we also ﬁnd
the best probing time, which is relatively short in the U.S. market and relatively long in Asian markets.
Furthermore, we conduct experiments on a TAIEX futures transaction dataset to analyze the relationship
between the TORB signals and trader behavior, and ﬁnd that the TORB signals are in the same direction as
institutional traders, especially foreign investment institutions.
INDEX TERMS Index futures, open range breakout, technical analysis, traders’ behavior, trading strategy.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the development of information technology, a consid-
erable amount of data has been generated and thus can be
utilized to produce useful information and insights to better
solve various problems in many ﬁelds including ﬁnance,
social science, and environmental science [1]. Data science
provides a scientiﬁc way to capture and verify the informa-
tion behind the data, which promotes productivity, improves
efﬁciency, and supports innovation [2]. In the ﬁled of ﬁnance,
many studies, including research related to trading, credit
rating, and fraud detection, have been done through various
data analytic techniques [3], among which backtesting on
historical data is a common approach to calculate the prof-
itability of a trading system and is used to ﬁnd proﬁtable
strategies [4].
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Jinsong Wu.
In this paper, we propose several TORB (timely open range
breakout) strategies for index futures market trading which
are proﬁtable in recent years, in which we use one-minute
transaction data in more than ten years to assess the proﬁtabil-
ity of the proposed strategies. The parameters for the TORB
strategies are selected based on the following three observa-
tions. First, trading volumes and ﬂuctuations in returns on
each one-minute interval during trading hours on the futures
markets reach their peaks at the opening of the underlying
stock markets. Thus, we provide two market ﬂuctuation mea-
surements for each one-minute interval during the trading
hours: the per-minute mean volume, denoted by PMMV
and the per-minute variance of return, denoted by PMVR.
These two measurements are used to deﬁne a time period
with high volumes and large ﬂuctuations as active hours; we
observe that a futures market’s active hours are the same as
the opening hours of the underlying stock market. Second,
stock market ﬂuctuations are inﬂuenced by events occurring
during and after the market. Although the markets do not
VOLUME 7, 2019
2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
32061
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
respond in real time to events occurring after the market,
it seems that the market picks up the information in the early
stage of market opening, and impacts market dynamics on
the same day. Finally, the higher frequency data contains
more information for technical analysis [5], which means that
using higher frequency data may improve the performance
of a technical trading strategy. Based on these three obser-
vations, the following hypothesis is proposed. The dynamic
of prices in the early stage of market opening reveals more
information in a trading day; therefore, it is proﬁtable by
using the information in the one-minute movements in prices
during this period to forecast the price for the rest time on the
same day.
To test this hypothesis, we set up the TORB strategy
parameters using the information picked up by the market
in the early stage of market opening and then conduct prof-
itability tests on the Dow Jones Industrial Average Index
(DJIA), Standard & Poor’s 500 (S&P 500), NASDAQ, Hang
Seng Index (HSI), and Taiwan Stock Exchange Capitalization
Weighted Stock Index (TAIEX) index futures markets from
2003 to 2013. The experimental results show that the TORB
strategy in each market achieves over 8% annual return with
a p-value of less than 3% of t-test with transaction costs,
signiﬁcantly rejecting the null hypothesis that the return from
TORB strategies equals zero; additionally, the best perfor-
mance in our experiments reaches a 20 .28% annual return
in the TAIEX with p-value equal to 1 × 10−4%. Further-
more, experiments in sub-periods from 2003 to 2007 and
from 2007 to 2013 are conducted to demonstrate that the
performance of TORB strategies does not change before or
after the ﬁnancial crisis.
Moreover, the experiments indicate that the TORB strate-
gies perform better than the TRB strategies deﬁned in [6].
While TRB and TORB strategies share the same concept,
TRB strategies set up the parameters by using daily data.
The results show that there are no signiﬁcant results ( p-value
less than 5%) in a proﬁtability test of TRB strategies on
the DJIA, S&P 500, HSI, and TAIEX futures indexes in the
full time period. The only exception is the NASDAQ index
future, which earns signiﬁcant proﬁts using TRB strategies;
however, there are no signiﬁcant results in the two sub-period
tests. Overall, the annual returns from the best TRB strategies
are smaller than the annual returns from TORB strategies
in all of the ﬁve futures markets tested in the experiments.
Our experimental results are consistent with the ﬁndings
in [5], which states that higher frequency data contains more
information for technical analysis.
In addition to attesting the proﬁtability of the
TORB strategies, we also investigate the relationship between
TORB signals and the behavior of informed traders. Gen-
erally speaking, informed traders are those who can predict
market returns using private information. Previous literature
has investigated what kind of traders are informed traders,
e.g., [7]–[11]. In 2014, Hendershott et al . [11] show that
institutional traders are informed by investigating the net buy
positions of institutions from 2003 to 2005 for NYSE-listed
stocks with all news announcements from Reuters. They ﬁnd
that institutions’ net buy positions increases (decreases) more
than ﬁve days prior to the announcement of good (bad) news,
as measured by the sentiment of the news. This implies that
institutions tend to trade in the same direction more than ﬁve
days before the news breaks. Additionally, Chang et al . [9]
use data from Taiwan to show that institutional traders are
informed, and also ﬁnd that foreign institutional investors
have greater predictive power than other kinds of institutional
traders. Tsai et al. [12] present the persistent behavior hypoth-
esis for ﬁnancial markets, which is tested statistically on ﬁve
stock indices from 2001 to 2014; they also study the impact
of investor behavior over market price of TAIEX futures.
In the experiments, we use a unique one-minute transaction
data set from the TAIEX futures market to investigate the
relationship between TORB signals and the net buy positions
of different kinds of traders. It is worth mentioning that the
signals from the best TORB strategy are positively related
to the net buy positions of institutional traders before and
after breakout, meaning that TORB signals catch the trading
direction of institutional traders, which is positively related to
the market return; the inverse results are found for individual
traders.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work, and Section III presents the param-
eter settings for the proposed TORB strategies. Empirical
data and experimental results are introduced and discussed
in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Technical analysis is one of the most popular methods for
developing trading strategies [13]. In contrast to fundamental
analysis, which uses macroeconomics and corporate informa-
tion regarding assets including earnings per share (EPS), sales
margins, dividend yields and other information, technical
analysis forecasts the future movement of prices using present
and past prices. For instance, in 2009, Schulmeister [5] inves-
tigates how technical trading systems exploit momentum and
reversal effects in the S&P 500 spot and futures markets and
ﬁnds that technical trading systems using 30-minute-price
information perform better than those using lower-frequency
information. In 2018, Alhashel and Hansz [14] apply vari-
ous popular technical trading rules to Asian property mar-
ket indices to investigate the proﬁtability of these rules and
ﬁnd that technical indicators are predictive in some markets
and thus can generate returns that exceed the buy-and-hold
strategy.
The proﬁtability of technical analysis strategies has been
studied extensively. In 1992, Brock et al . [6] test two of
the most popular trading rules – the moving average (MA)
and trading range break (TRB) – using 90 years of Dow
Jones Index data and ﬁnd signiﬁcant results in proﬁtability
tests with both standard statistical analysis and bootstrap
techniques. In 2009, Zhu and Zhou [15] modify the MA
trading rule to adjust asset allocation. In the same year,
Neely et al. [16] use previously studied trading rules, such as
32062 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
MA, to test the inter-temporal stability of excess returns in
the foreign exchange market and ﬁnd positive excess returns
from MA during the 1970s and 1980s, though the proﬁt
opportunities disappeared in the early 1990s. They conclude
that this outcome is consistent with the adaptive markets
hypothesis [17]. In 2010, Szakmary et al . [18] investigate
commodity futures markets using a monthly dataset spanning
48 years and 28 markets; the results show that trend-following
trading strategies yield positive mean excess returns net of
transactions costs in at least 22 out of the 28 markets. In 2018,
Ahmad et al . [19] test the applicability of moving aver-
age (MA) investment timing strategy on individual stocks and
portfolios, and they ﬁnd MA strategy substantially beats the
buy-and-hold strategy by yielding higher average returns and
Sharpe ratios, lower standard deviations, and much success
ratios across portfolios.
Open range breakout (ORB) [20] is a common technical
trading strategy based on momentum effects. A trader sets a
predetermined threshold of upper and lower bounds to denote
the open range, and the trading strategy is to long (or short)
a position as the market price moves beyond the upper (or
lower) bound. Several ORB variants have been discussed in
recent studies (see [21]–[23]). In 2010, Cekirdekci studies
various trading strategies based on 30-minute open range
breakouts, and demonstrates proﬁtability by back-testing on
250 stocks from various industry groups between 2005 and
2010 [21]. Two ORB variants based on average true range
and volatility breakout are considered in [22], which pro-
vides the evidence for the ORB strategy proﬁtability in the
Bucharest Exchange Trade index. Chang et al . show the
ORB strategy proﬁtability based on a normally distributed
return on the day the open range is broken; their result
shows the characteristics of an increased success rate in a
fair game [23]. However, it has been shown in the liter-
ature that the performance of technical analysis has been
deteriorating in recent years (see [5], [16], [21], [24]). For
the ORB trading strategy, Borda et al . in 2010 state that
22 stocks perform well with ORB from 2005 to 2010 in U.S.
markets; but these 22 stocks are from 250 stocks of their
test, which means most of the stocks are unproﬁtable [21].
Moreover, their strategies are limited to stock trading and
cannot be used in derivatives trading. In 2017, Lund-
ström et al . [25] study the returns of ORB across volatil-
ity states for long time series data of crude oil and S&P
500 future contracts, and their results indicate that the average
ORB return increases with the volatility of the underlying
asset.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe the mechanism to set the param-
eters of TORB strategies in futures markets. Section III-A
deﬁnes the two variables PMMV and PMVR which are
used to identify active hours for futures market trading.
In Section III-B, we describe the trading rules of the proposed
TORB strategies.
FIGURE 1. The (a) long (buy) and (b) short (sell) positions in TORB. The
curve denotes the futures price; tb and te denote the beginning and the
ending of the observed period, respectively; tp denotes the end of the
observed period and is an independent variable in our experiments. The
resistance/support levels are the highest/lowest prices of the duration
[tb, tp], and the time of entering the market is the time that the price
crosses over the resistance level. (a) Long (buy) position.
A. DEFINITIONS OF PMMV AND PMVR
We ﬁrst deﬁne the two variables PMMV and PMVR that
measure the ﬂuctuations of futures markets. Let Vt,d be the
trading volume in the one-minute interval t on day d, where
t0 < t < T and t0 and T are the open and the close times of
the futures markets, respectively. PMMV is deﬁned as
PMMV t=
N∑
d=1
Vt,d
N , (1)
where N is the total number of trading days. Let Pt,d be
the close price in the one-minute interval t on day d. Thus,
the one-minute return is denoted as
rt,d= log(Pt,d )− log(Pt−1,d ).
PMVR is deﬁned as
PMVRt= V ar(rt,d ). (2)
The above two measures in Equations (1) and (2) are used to
identify active hours for futures market trading.
B. TORB TRADING RULES
The TORB trading signals are illustrated in Figure 1 and
described as follows: We set the resistance (support) levels as
the highest (lowest) prices for a predetermined period termed
the observed period. The trading signal is revealed once the
price exceeds the upper bound or falls below the lower bound.
We consider two cases:
1) If the price moves above the resistance level, then the
buying strength is greater than the selling pressure, and
the price will continue to move up with this trend.
VOLUME 7, 2019 32063
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
TABLE 1. E-mini DJIA daily returns.
2) If the price drops below the support level, then the
selling strength is greater than the buying pressure,
and the price will continue to move down with this
trend.
To build a TORB strategy with the intraday data, we must
determine three time points: the beginning time-point of the
observed period, the end time point of the observed period,
and the time point of the closing position. The beginning
of observed period, denoted as tb, is set to the beginning of
the active hours, and the time point of the closing position,
denoted as te is set to the end of the active hours; the end of
the observed period is the probe time tp, where tb < tp < te.
The sufﬁcient conditions for the buying and selling signals of
day d are
Pt′,d > max(Ptb,d,··· , Ptp,d )⇒ Buy, (3)
Pt′,d < min(Ptb,d,··· , Ptp,d )⇒ Sell, (4)
where Pt′,d is the price at time t′ on day d and tp< t′< te. If
there is a trading signal on a day, the position closes at te on
that day.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Two data sets are adopted in our experiments: The ﬁrst one
contains one-minute intraday data of the ﬁve futures mar-
kets and the second one contains transaction data for the
TAIEX index futures. For the ﬁrst data set, we investigate
the spot month E-mini futures of the DJIA (from 2003/1/2 to
2013/12/2), S&P 500 (from 2001/1/2 to 2013/12/2), and
NASDAQ 100 (from 2001/1/2 to 2013/12/2) plus two
spot month futures indexes, the HSI in Hong Kong (from
2003/1/2 to 2011/3/4), 1 and the TAIEX in Taiwan (from
2001/1/2 to 2013/11/28). In addition to the full time period,
to account for the global ﬁnancial crisis during 2007 to 2008,
test results are presented for the two sub-periods before and
after 2007/1/1. The second data set contains transaction data
1Although the spot month futures data for HSI is from 2003/1/2 to
2013/12/2, due to the changes in trading times beginning on 2011/3/7,
we conduct experiments only on the data from 2003/1/2 to 2011/3/4.
TABLE 2. E-mini S&P daily returns.
TABLE 3. E-mini-NASDAQ daily returns.
TABLE 4. HSI daily returns.
for the TAIEX index futures from 2006/7/1 to 2013/12/31, 2
which is utilized to test the relationship between TORB sig-
nals and trader behavior.
This section presents the experimental results, including
the identiﬁcation of active hours in Section IV -A, the TORB
proﬁtability tests in Section IV -B, and the relationships
2The data is non-public and customized by Taiwan Futures Exchange,
summarizing the one-minute transactions of the buys and sells of all traders,
dealers, domestic institutions, and foreign investment institutions.
32064 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
TABLE 5. TAIEX daily returns.
FIGURE 2. E-mini DJIA PMMV and PMVR. There are three major peaks for
PMMV and PMVR from 2003 to 2013, including 8:30 (the opening time of
the underlying market), 9:00, and 15:00 (the closing time of the
underlying market).
TABLE 6. Best strategies in the full samples test of TORB.
between TORB signals and trader behavior in Section IV -C.
Before we present the experimental results, Tables 1 to 5
show the statistics of daily returns of the ﬁve future mar-
kets, in which returns are measured as percentage differences
in the logarithm of the future prices. In the ﬁve futures,
the means of the daily returns are positive, except for the
E-mini NASDAQ in the 2003–2007 sub-period, which also
shows the largest standard deviation. In the full time period,
FIGURE 3. E-mini S&P PMMV and PMVR. There are two major peaks for
PMVR in E-mini S&P, including 8:30 (the opening time of the underlying
market) and 9:00. Also, there are two small corresponding peaks for
PMMV. For the case of PMMV, there is a major peak near the closing time
(15:00) of the underlying market.
FIGURE 4. E-mini NASDAQ PMMV and PMVR. There are two major peaks
for PMVR, including 8:30 (the opening time of the underlying market) and
9:00. Also, there are two small corresponding peaks for PMMV. For the
case of PMMV, there is a major peak near the closing time (15:00) of the
underlying market.
TABLE 7. Best strategies in the sub-period (01–07) test of TORB.
all ﬁve futures markets have negative skewness; in sub-
periods 2007 to 2013, except for the HSI, all futures have
negative skewness, which is probably due to the global ﬁnan-
cial crisis. However, the skewness values are small in all
VOLUME 7, 2019 32065
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
FIGURE 5. HSI PMMV and PMVR. There are two major peaks for PMVR,
including 12:30 (the start time of the lunch break of the underlying
market) and 16:00 (the closing time of the underlying market). For the
case of PMMV, there are five major peaks, including 09:45 and 16:15 (the
opening and the closing time of the futures market), 10:00 and 16:00 (the
opening and the closing time of the underlying market), and 12:30 (the
start time of the lunch break of the underlying market).
FIGURE 6. TAIEX PMMV and PMVR. There are four major peaks for PMVR
and PMMV, including 08:45 and 09:00 (the opening time of the futures
market and the underlying market), 13:45 and 13:30 (the closing time of
the futures market and the underlying market).
TABLE 8. Best strategies in the sub-period (07–13) test of TORB.
futures except the TAIEX. In addition, ρ(i) denotes the esti-
mated i days lag auto-correlation, and the marks ∗,∗∗, and
∗∗∗ represent the signiﬁcance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels,
FIGURE 7. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed p-value
of DJIA in the full samples test.
respectively. As shown in the tables, for the E-mini DJIA,
the ﬁrst-order serial correlations in both the full time period
and the second sub-period are signiﬁcantly negative, but the
other-order serial correlations are rather small; for the E-mini
S&P 500 and the E-mini NASDAQ, there are signiﬁcant
negative serial correlations in the ﬁrst two orders.
A. ACTIVE HOURS
Figures 2 to 6 illustrate the PMMV and PMVR for each
minute for the ﬁve futures markets. Figure 2 shows for both
PMMV and PMVR a peak around 8:30, which is the open-
ing time of the underlying market, and the values between
8:30 and 9:00 are generally larger than those at other time
points; additionally, there is another PMMV peak around
15:00, the closing time of the underlying market, and a
PMVR peak around 15:15, the closing time of the E-mini
DJIA. For both E-mini S&P in Figure 3 and E-mini NASDAQ
in Figure 4, there are peaks for both PMMV and PMVR
around the opening and closing times of the underlying mar-
kets. Observe from Figure 5 for HSI that there are peaks not
only around the opening (10:00) and closing (16:00) times
of the underlying market, but also a peak around 14:30 for
both PMVR and PMMV, which is due to the lunch break
from 12:30 to 14:30. Figure 6 shows that the TAIEX has
four peaks: Two around the opening time (9:00) and closing
time (13:30) of the underlying market, and the other two
32066 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
FIGURE 8. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed p-value
of DJIA in the sub-period (03–07) test.
TABLE 9. Best strategies in the full samples test of TRB.
around the opening time (8:46) and closing time (13:44)
of the futures market. To summarize the results of PMVR
and PMMV in these ﬁve futures markets, we conclude that
there are peaks around the opening and closing times of the
underlying market; therefore, we set the active hours as the
opening to closing times of the underlying market for each
future market in the following experiments.
B. TORB PROFITABILITY TEST
After establishing the active hours, we use Equations (3) and
(4) to build TORB strategies with the probe time as a parame-
ter. Figure 7 shows the back-testing results for the DJIA in the
full time period. The top of the ﬁgure shows the numbers of
the TORB transactions, in which the number of transactions
decreases when the probe time moves away from the begin-
ning of the active hours; in this case, the boundary is larger,
FIGURE 9. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed p-value
of DJIA in the sub-period (07–13) test.
TABLE 10. Best strategies in the sub-period (01–07) test of TRB.
TABLE 11. Best strategies in the sub-period (07–13) test of TRB.
and the probability decreases for the price to break out of the
boundary on the same day. The second illustrates the average
annual returns of the TORB strategies with transaction costs;3
3Here we follow Schulmeister’s estimation to assume an overall transac-
tion cost of 0.01% (per trade) [5].
VOLUME 7, 2019 32067
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
TABLE 12. Average daily volumes (buy positions plus sell positions).
FIGURE 10. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed
p-value of S&P in the full samples test.
from the ﬁgure, we observe that strategies with the probe
time in the early stages earn a signiﬁcantly higher annual
return. The third and the bottom ones are the t-statistic and
the one-tailed p-value of the t-test, respectively, with respect
to the null hypothesis that the TORB returns equal zero.
When the probe time is within ﬁve minutes, there are four
strategies that signiﬁcantly reject the null hypothesis with the
p-value less than 5%. Note that since the sub-period results
are similar to those of the full time period (see Figures 8
and 9), we show only the results for the full time period for the
rest of the markets. Figures 10 and 11 are the results for the
S&P 500 and the NASDAQ, respectively, in which the results
are similar to those for the DJIA, and again the probe time
within the ﬁrst 5 minutes earns the highest annual returns with
signiﬁcant p-values. Similar to the results in the US market,
as shown in Figure 13, TORB strategies on the HSI earn
signiﬁcantly higher returns in the early stages of the stock
market opening; additionally, TORB strategies also earn
FIGURE 11. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed
p-value of NASDAQ in the full samples test.
signiﬁcantly higher returns with probe times around 150 min-
utes. The phenomenon may be due to the difference in market
structures and market efﬁciency; for example, the lunch break
from 12:30 to 14:30 in the Hong Kong market may affect the
performance of the technical analysis. Figure 13 shows that
the strategies on the TAIEX with probe times less than 200
minutes earn signiﬁcantly higher returns.
Table 6 tabulates the best strategies in the ﬁve markets in
the full time period, where the best strategies are deﬁned
as those that earn the most proﬁt in the full time periods.
The best strategies for the E-mini DJIA, E-mini S&P 500,
and E-mini NASDAQ are all with short probe times (4, 1,
and 1 minutes, respectively), whereas for the HIS and the
TAIEX, the probe times of the best strategies are 151 minutes
and 37 minutes, respectively. The average annual returns of
the best strategies in all markets are greater than 8%, with
p-values less than 3%. Additionally, as shown in
Tables 7 and 8, except for the E-mini DJIA in the sub-period
32068 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
TABLE 13. TORB returns and net buy positions of different traders.
FIGURE 12. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed
p-value of HSI in the full samples test.
from 2003 to 2007 and the E-mini S&P in the sub-period from
2007 to 2013, the best strategies earn signiﬁcantly higher
returns.
To compare the TORB strategies with TRB strategies,
we brieﬂy describe the TRB strategies in [6]: The TRB ini-
tiates a buy (sell) signal when the price is greater (less) than
the product of (1+ X ) and the local maximum (minimum) of
the price in the previous D days, where X is the percentage
band (e.g., 0, 1, 2%). When the buy (sell) signals are revealed,
we open the positions and hold them for ten days. 4 Table 9
4In the experiments, we test D= 2 to D= 200 with bands as X= 0 or
X= 1%.
demonstrates the best TRB strategies in the ﬁve markets in the
full time period. The experimental results suggest that there is
no signiﬁcant result (p-value less than 5%) in the proﬁtability
tests for all TRB strategies on the DJIA, S&P 500, HSI,
TAIEX futures indexes in the full time periods. Although the
best strategy in the full time period on the NASDAQ earns
signiﬁcant proﬁts ( p− value= 4.37%), the annual return
5.58% is much less than the annual return 17.51% of the best
TORB strategy on the same market. In addition, in the two
sub-period tests shown in Tables 10 and 11, there is no sig-
niﬁcant result on the NASDAQ. We therefore conclude that
there is no consistently signiﬁcant result from the probability
tests of TRB strategies on these ﬁve futures markets in these
two sub-period tests.
C. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TORB SIGNALS AND TRADER
BEHAVIOR
This subsection examines the relationship between TORB
signals and trader behavior with the transaction and price data
from the TAIEX futures market. Table 12 summarizes the
daily volumes (buy positions plus sell positions) for different
kinds of traders. From the table, the average daily volume of
all traders is about 175,663.5; we observe that the daily vol-
ume for individual traders is about twice that for institutional
traders.
Table 13 shows the returns of the TORB strategies (second
column) and the net buy positions for different kinds of
traders (third, fourth, and ﬁfth columns) before breakout (BB)
and after breakout (AB). The data is group by the TORB
buy (sell) signals and the data with the TORB buy (sell)
signals is tabulated in the row of GB (GS, respectively). The
numbers in parentheses are the t-statistics of the t-test under
the null hypothesis that the data in GB (GS) and the all
data have equal means and equal but unknown variances. As
shown in the table, while the numbers of the net buy positions
for institutional traders are positively related to the TORB
returns before and after breakout, those for individual traders
are negatively related to the TORB returns before and after
breakout. The results suggest that by following the TORB sig-
nals, one trades in the same direction as institutional traders,
and thus obtains positive returns. Additionally, in Table 14,
VOLUME 7, 2019 32069
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
TABLE 14. TORB returns and net buy positions of different types of institutional traders.
FIGURE 13. Trading number, average annual return, and one-tailed
p-value of TAIEX in the full samples test.
we detail the returns of the TORB strategies and the numbers
of the net buy positions for different types of institutional
traders before and after breakout. We observe that the returns
of the TORB strategies are all positively related to the three
types of institutional traders after breakout; in particular,
the returns are signiﬁcantly and positively related to foreign
investment institutions both before and after breakout. These
results are consistent with the ﬁndings in [9], which claim
that the TORB signals are positively related to the trading
direction of foreign investment institutions, who are usually
considered the most informed traders in the Taiwan market.
Lots of analysts and traders in investment institutions have
conducted in-depth analysis to develop trading strategies.
However, the directions of trading positions of TORB signals
are almost the same as those of the positions of invest-
ment institutions. In addition, we use statistical veriﬁcation
(t-statistic, p-value) to assess the proﬁtability of our pro-
posed solution, TORB. Previous experiments in ﬁve futures
markets have shown that the TORB strategy has signiﬁcant
proﬁtability in all markets to achieve higher returns than the
TRB strategy does. Further, we propose PMMV , PMVR to
observe the market volatility, and align the active hours of
TORB at the most appropriate times which are the opening
and closing time of the underlying index market. At the last
time parameter (tp), probing time, we examine all the param-
eters to get the best return and conﬁdence in proﬁtability.
Based on the observations of the markets (PMMV , PMVR),
statistical veriﬁcation of proﬁtability ( t-statistics, p-values)
and the analogy analysis of trader behavior, the proposed
TORB strategy is attested to be proﬁtable.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes proﬁtable TORB strategies for trading on
the index futures market. We test the proﬁtability of the pro-
posed strategies with E-mini-DJIA, E-mini S&P 500, E-mini
NASDAQ, HSI, and TAIEX. The proﬁtability tests show that
the TORB strategies in each futures market achieve an over
8% annual return with p-value less than 3% in the t-test; the
best performance, a 20.28% annual return with a 1× 10−4%
p-value, is reached in the TAIEX. In addition, the TORB
strategies perform consistently in the two sub-periods before
and after the ﬁnancial crisis in 2007; in contrast, there is no
consistent result in the probability test of the TRB strategies
in these ﬁve futures markets, which is in line with the ﬁnd-
ings in [5]. Our experimental results suggest that by using
the one-minute price information, TORB strategies capture
more useful information than TRB strategies, and thus earn
signiﬁcantly higher proﬁts. We also conduct experiments on
unique transactions data from the TAIEX futures market, one
interesting ﬁnding of which is that by following the TORB
signals, we trade in the same direction as institutional traders,
especially foreign investment institutions.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wu, S. Guo, J. Li, and D. Zeng, ‘‘Big data meet green challenges: Big
data toward green applications,’’IEEE Syst. J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 888–900,
Sep. 2016.
32070 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y.-C. Tsai et al.: Assessing the Profitability of TORB on Index Futures Markets
[2] J. Wu, S. Guo, H. Huang, W. Liu, and Y . Xiang, ‘‘Information and com-
munications technologies for sustainable development goals: State-of-the-
art, needs and perspectives,’’ IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 2389–2406, 3rd Quart., 2018.
[3] F. Provost and T. Fawcet, Data Science and its Relationship to Big Data
and Data-Driven Decision Making . New Rochelle, NY , USA: Mary Ann
Liebert, 2013.
[4] D. V ezeris, C. Schinas, and G. Papaschinopoulos, ‘‘Proﬁtability edge by
dynamic back testing optimal period selection for technical parameters
optimization, in trading systems with forecasting,’’Comput. Econ., vol. 51,
no. 4, pp. 761–807, 2018.
[5] S. Schulmeister, ‘‘Proﬁtability of technical stock trading: Has it moved
from daily to intraday data?’’ Rev. Financial Econ. , vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 190–201, 2009.
[6] W. Brock, J. Lakonishok, and B. LeBaron, ‘‘Simple technical trading rules
and the stochastic properties of stock returns,’’ J. Finance, vol. 47, no. 5,
pp. 1731–1764, 1992.
[7] E. Boehmer and E. K. Kelley, ‘‘Institutional investors and the informational
efﬁciency of prices,’’ Rev. Financial Stud., vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 3563–3594,
2009.
[8] J. Y . Campbell, T. Ramadorai, and A. Schwartz, ‘‘Caught on tape: Insti-
tutional trading, stock returns, and earnings announcements,’’ J. Financial
Econ., vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 66–91, 2009.
[9] C.-C. Chang, P .-F. Hsieh, and H.-N. Lai, ‘‘Do informed option investors
predict stock returns? Evidence from the taiwan stock exchange,’’ J. Bank-
ing Finance, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 757–764, 2009.
[10] A. Boulatov, T. Hendershott, and D. Livdan, ‘‘Informed trading and port-
folio returns,’’ Rev. Econ. Stud., vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 35–72, 2013.
[11] T. Hendershott, D. Livdan, and N. Schürhoff, ‘‘Are institutions informed
about news?’’ J. Financial Econ., vol. 117, no. 2, pp. 249–287, 2015.
[12] Y .-C. Tsai, C.-L. Lei, W. Cheung, C.-S. Wu, J.-M. Ho, and
C.-J. Wang, ‘‘Exploring the persistent behavior of ﬁnancial markets,’’
Finance Res. Lett., vol. 24, pp. 199–220, 2018.
[13] C.-H. Park and S. H. Irwin, ‘‘What do we know about the proﬁtability of
technical analysis?’’ J. Econ. Surv., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 786–826, 2007.
[14] B. S. Alhashel, F. W. Almudhaf, and J. A. Hansz, ‘‘Can technical analysis
generate superior returns in securitized property markets? evidence from
east asia markets,’’ Paciﬁc-Basin Finance J., vol. 47, pp. 92–108, 2018.
[15] Y . Zhu and G. Zhou, ‘‘Technical analysis: An asset allocation perspec-
tive on the use of moving averages,’’ J. Financial Econ. , vol. 92, no. 3,
pp. 519–544, 2009.
[16] C. J. Neely, P . A. Weller, and J. M. Ulrich, ‘‘The adaptive markets hypoth-
esis: Evidence from the foreign exchange market,’’ J. Financial Quant.
Anal., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 467–488, 2009.
[17] A. W. Lo, ‘‘The adaptive markets hypothesis: Market efﬁciency from an
evolutionary perspective,’’J. Portfolio Manage., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 15–29,
2004.
[18] A. C. Szakmary, S. Qia, and S. C. Sharma, ‘‘Trend-following trading
strategies in commodity futures: A re-examination,’’ J. Banking, Finance,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 409–426, 2010.
[19] M. I. Ahmad, W. Ghohui, M. Hasan, A. Sattar, M. Ahmad, and
R. U. Rehman, ‘‘Performance of moving average investment timing strat-
egy in UK stock market: Individual stocks versus portfolios,’’ J. Econ.
Social Stud., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5–21, 2018.
[20] T. Crabel, Day Trading With Short Term Price Patterns Opening Range
Breakout. Madison, WI, USA: Traders Press, 1990.
[21] M. E. Cekirdekci, ‘‘Trading system development: Trading the opening
range breakouts,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Worcester Polytech. Inst., Worcester,
MA, USA, 2010.
[22] M. Borda, I. Nistor, and M. Gherman, ‘‘Opening range trading strategies
aplied on daily and intra day data: The case of bet index,’’ Rev. Econ. Stud.
Res. Virgil Madgearu, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 79–96, 2011.
[23] U. Holmberg and C. Lönnbark, and C. Lundström, ‘‘Assessing the prof-
itability of intraday opening range breakout strategies,’’Finance Res. Lett.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 27–33, 2013.
[24] W. Cheung, K. S. Lam, and H. Y eung, ‘‘Intertemporal proﬁtability and
the stability of technical analysis: Evidences from the hong kong stock
exchange,’’Appl. Econ., vol. 43, no. 15, pp. 1945–1963, 2011.
[25] C. Lundström, ‘‘Day trading returns across volatility states,’’ Dept. Eco-
nomics,. Umeå Univ., Umeå, Sweden, Tech. Rep., 2017.
YI-CHENG TSAI received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, in 2004 and 2006, respectively, where he is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include computational ﬁnance, risk
management, investment behavior, and ﬁnancial data analysis.
MU-EN WU received the bachelor’s degree from the Department of Mathe-
matics, National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan, in 2002, the master’s degree
from the Department of Applied Mathematics, National Chiao Tung Uni-
versity, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer
Science, National Tsing-Hua University, in 2009. He is currently an Assistant
Professor with the Department of Information and Finance Management,
National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan. He has authored
or co-authored over 50 papers in referred journals and conferences in the
area of information security, cryptography, and ﬁnancial data analysis. His
research interests include cryptography, money management, and ﬁnancial
data analysis.
JIA-HAO SYU is currently pursuing the bachelor’s degree with the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. He is going to enter the master’s program of the
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National
Taiwan University, in 2019. His research interests include ﬁnancial data
analysis, computational ﬁnance, investment behavior, and data science.
CHIN-LAUNG LEI received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from
National Taiwan University, Taipei, in 1980, and the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter science from The University of Texas at Austin, in 1986. From 1986 to
1988, he was an Assistant Professor with the Computer and Information Sci-
ence Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. In 1988,
he joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering, National
Taiwan University, where he is currently a Professor. He has published more
than 250 technical articles in scientiﬁc journals and conference proceedings.
His current research interests include information security, cloud computing,
and data science. He is a co-winner of the ﬁrst IEEE LICS Test-of-Time
Award.
CHUNG-SHU WU has been the President of the Chung-Hua Institution for
Economic Research, since 2011. He is also an Adjunct Research Fellow of
the Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica, and an Adjunct Professor of
the Department of Economics, National Taiwan University.
JAN-MING HO received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from
National Cheng Kung University, in 1978, the M.S. degree from the Institute
of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, in 1980, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Northwestern
University, in 1989. He joined the Institute of Information Science, Academia
Sinica, as an Associate Research Fellow, in 1989, and was promoted to
Research Fellow, in 1994, where he served as a Deputy Director of the Insti-
tute, from 2000 to 2003. From 2004 to 2006, he was the Director General of
the Division of Planning and Evaluation, National Science Council. He vis-
ited the IBMs T. J. Watson Research Center, in 1987 and 1988, the Leonardo
Fibonacci Institute for the Foundations of Computer Science, Italy, in 1992,
and the Dagstuhl Seminar on Applied Combinatorial Methods in VLSI/CAD,
Germany, in 1993. His research interests include the integration of theory
and applications, including combinatorial optimization, information retrieval
and extraction, multimedia network protocols, bioinformatics, and digital
library and archive technologies. He also published results in the ﬁeld of
VLSI/CAD physical design. He has served as a Board Member for several
NPOs, including the Institute of Information and Computing Machinery
(IICM), the Frontier Foundation, Taiwan, the Y .T. Lee Foundation Science
Education, and the WuSanLien Foundation on Taiwanese History. He served
as the President of the Software Liberty Association Taiwan, from 2004 to
2008, and the President of IICM, from 2007 to 2009.
CHUAN-JU WANG received the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and information engineering from National Taiwan University, in 2011.
Before joining the Research Center of Information Technology Innovation,
Academia Sinica, as an Assistant Research Fellow, in 2016, she was an
Associate Professor with the University of Taipei, Taiwan. Her research
interests include computational ﬁnance and data analytics.
VOLUME 7, 2019 32071