The Fed and the stock market: A tale of sentiment states q
Haifeng Guo a, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung b, Alexandros Kontonikas c,⇑
a Durham University Business School, Durham University, Durham, UK
b Adam Smith Business School, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK
c Essex Business School, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
article info
Article history:
Available online 9 July 2022
JEL classiﬁcation::
E52
G12
G14
Keywords:
Investor Sentiment
Monetary Policy Surprises
Event Study
abstract
We analyze the period before the zero lower bound and show that the state of investor sen-
timent strongly affects the transmission of monetary policy to the stock market. The
impact of Federal funds rate (FFR) surprises is mostly potent when sentiment-driven over-
valuation is followed by a correction, whereby the stock market increases by 0.8% in
response to an unexpected FFR cut of 10 basis points. Our ﬁndings suggest that monetary
easing surprises during sentiment-waning phases boost the stock market by alleviating
investors’ fear. The ability of sentiment to drive the observed state dependence is hard
to reconcile with rational pricing.
/C2112022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
‘‘Animal spirits, sentiment, psychology, whatever you want to call it, was central to the economic and ﬁnancial story ... ” (B.
Bernanke, 2015 ).

ecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
‘‘Animal spirits, sentiment, psychology, whatever you want to call it, was central to the economic and ﬁnancial story ... ” (B.
Bernanke, 2015 ).
In this paper we document that the transmission of monetary policy news to the U.S. stock market depends on the state of
investor sentiment. We show that the stock market reacts strongly to monetary policy surprises only during sentiment-
waning phases, which are largely distinct from recessions and bear market episodes. Classical ﬁnance theory and standard
models of the monetary policy transmission mechanism can not explain this effect since they leave no role for investor sen-
timent (Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Baker and Wurgler, 2006 ). Hence, they would predict no difference in the stock market
return response to policy shocks across different states of investor sentiment. The capacity of sentiment to drive the
observed JEL classiﬁcation:state dependence is hard to reconcile with rational pricing.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jimonﬁn.2022.102707
0261-5606//C2112022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
qWe thank Panayiotis Andreou, Malcolm Baker, Jerry Coakley, Chris Florackis, Alexandros Kostakis, Alexander Kurov, Paulo Maio, William Megginson,

( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
qWe thank Panayiotis Andreou, Malcolm Baker, Jerry Coakley, Chris Florackis, Alexandros Kostakis, Alexander Kurov, Paulo Maio, William Megginson,
Alberto Montagnoli, Kjell Nyborg, Stefan Ruenzi, Antonios Siganos, Eric Swanson, Evangelos Vagenas-Nanos, Patrick Verwijmeren, Nikos Vlastakis , Jeffrey
Wurgler, conference participants at the 2019 Financial Management and Accounting Research Conference, the 2019 Inﬁniti Conference, the 3rd Israel
Behavioural Finance Conference, the 23rd Conference on Macroeconomic Analysis and International Finance, the 2018 Financial Management Associat ion
Conference, the 2018 Financial Stability and Banking Conference, the 2017 Financial Management Association Asian Conference, the 2017 European
Financial Management Association Conference, the 7th International Conference of the Financial Engineering and Banking Society, the 2017 World Ba nking
and Finance Symposium, the 2017 Behavioural Finance Working Group Conference, the 2017 Conference on the Theories and Practises of Securities and
Financial Markets, and seminar participants at National Bank of Slovakia, Middlesex University, University of Essex, University of Glasgow, Nanka i
University and National Cheng Kung University for useful comments and suggestions.
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: haifeng.guo@durham.ac.uk (H. Guo), chihsiou.hung@glasgow.ac.uk (C.-H.D. Hung), a.kontonikas@essex.ac.uk (A. Kontonikas).

for useful comments and suggestions.
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: haifeng.guo@durham.ac.uk (H. Guo), chihsiou.hung@glasgow.ac.uk (C.-H.D. Hung), a.kontonikas@essex.ac.uk (A. Kontonikas).
Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of International Money and Finance
journal homepag e: www.elsevier.c om/locate/jimf

Investor sentiment can be deﬁned as investors’ beliefs about asset valuation that are not justiﬁed by the existing facts.
This is consistent with extensive work in the literature ( Shleifer and Summers, 1990; Kumar and Lee, 2006; Baker and
Wurgler, 2007 ).1 Investors may assign excessively optimistic valuations, by overestimating the size of future cash ﬂows and/
or by underestimating risk ( Mian and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012 ), and in the presence of limits to arbitrage, stocks are over-
priced (De Long et al., 1990; Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Baker and Wurgler, 2007 ). The mispricing tends to be corrected during
sentiment-waning phases ( Huang et al., 2015 ), with varying degrees of pricing correction across different categories of stocks
(Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Stambaugh et al., 2012 ). The correction generates investment losses, and
uncertainty about exposure to future losses, making investors anxious and fearful. We hypothesize that monetary policy easing
news during sentiment-waning phases boost the stock market by alleviating investors’ fear.
Prior research has documented a strong link between stock returns and monetary policy shifts ( Bernanke and Kuttner,
2005; Kontonikas et al., 2013; Maio, 2014; Ozdagli, 2017 ). This literature suggests that the positive stock market response
to expansionary policy surprises can be interpreted within the dividend discount model or more advanced macroeconomic-

zdagli, 2017 ). This literature suggests that the positive stock market response
to expansionary policy surprises can be interpreted within the dividend discount model or more advanced macroeconomic-
based models that highlight the importance of a risk factor related to the stance of monetary policy ( Balvers and Huang,
2009; Lioui and Maio, 2014 ).
2 These studies, however, do not consider the role of investor sentiment. In this paper we pay close
attention to capturing the state of sentiment and ensuring that it is not confounded by the state of the economy.
For our baseline analysis, we measure sentiment using the U.S. Conference Board’s Conﬁdence Index. Moreover, we show
that our results are robust to the use of two, also widely used, alternative measures: Baker and Wurgler’s (2006) Sentiment
Index and the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index. In order to capture optimism or pessimism that is not jus-
tiﬁed by economic fundamentals, we remove business cycle variation by orthogonalizing each of the sentiment measures to
a set of macroeconomic variables. We then construct sentiment states using two alternative approaches based on the orthog-
onalized indexes. The ﬁrst approach follows the existing literature and uses a classiﬁcation based on the level of sentiment at
the start of the year ( Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Yu and Yuan, 2011; Chung et al., 2012 ). The second approach is novel. Moti-

ng literature and uses a classiﬁcation based on the level of sentiment at
the start of the year ( Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Yu and Yuan, 2011; Chung et al., 2012 ). The second approach is novel. Moti-
vated by the mean-reverting nature of sentiment ( Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Yu and Yuan, 2011 ), it interacts the level of sen-
timent with changes in sentiment over the year. Essentially, it captures sentiment-waning phases, when sentiment starts at
high level but then declines. For example, the build-up of optimism during the ‘‘dot-com” boom of the late 1990s was fol-
lowed by a prolonged correction phase.
We use an event study methodology to estimate the stock market reaction to monetary policy surprises conditional on
investor sentiment states. Events are identiﬁed using meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the monetary
policy-making body of the Federal Reserve (Fed). Our sample covers the period from June 1989 to December 2008, hence
including the pre-crisis period and the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–2008. We analyze the stock market impact of monetary policy
surprises, measured by unexpected changes in the Federal funds rate (FFR) using the methodology of Kuttner (2001). At the
end-point of our sample, following several rate cuts during the ﬁnancial crisis, the FFR reached the zero lower bound (ZLB).
We ﬁnd that the state of investor sentiment strongly affects the transmission of monetary policy news to the stock mar-
ket.

uts during the ﬁnancial crisis, the FFR reached the zero lower bound (ZLB).
We ﬁnd that the state of investor sentiment strongly affects the transmission of monetary policy news to the stock mar-
ket. The effect of FFR surprises is mostly potent during sentiment-waning episodes, that is when sentiment starts high at the
beginning of the year but then falls. Our ﬁndings are robust to the choice of windows (daily vs. intraday) for measuring the
stock market’s response and a host of other sensitivity checks, including the use of alternative econometric speciﬁcations.
The estimates imply that during sentiment-waning phases the stock market rises by about 0.8% in response to an unexpected
cut of 10 basis points in the FFR. In contrast, during other sentiment states, such as phases of exuberance (pessimism) when
sentiment is already high (low) and keeps increasing (decreasing), the effect of FFR surprises is statistically insigniﬁcant.
Importantly, we show that the relationship is asymmetric with the stock market responding only to looser-than-
expected, as opposed to tighter-than-expected, monetary policy.
Our proposed explanation for the positive impact of monetary policy easing news on stock market returns during
sentiment-waning phases is related to the alleviation of investors’ fear. Using the variance risk premium component of
the VIX, which to a large extent reﬂects ‘‘crash-o-phobia” (Bollerslev and Todorov, 2011 ; p.2191), our ﬁndings align with this
conjecture.

nvestors’ fear. Using the variance risk premium component of
the VIX, which to a large extent reﬂects ‘‘crash-o-phobia” (Bollerslev and Todorov, 2011 ; p.2191), our ﬁndings align with this
conjecture. Extending previous work by Bekaert et al. (2013) , we show that the variance risk premium declines in response
to expansionary policy surprises only during sentiment-waning phases. Our evidence highlights the ability of sentiment to
drive state dependence in the link between monetary policy shocks and investors’ fear, which is difﬁcult to reconcile with
the notion of rational pricing ( Yu and Yuan, 2011 ). Further, we consider various alternative explanations and potential con-
founding factors and show that our main ﬁndings hold.
This paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, there is a nascent line of work that draws insights from
behavioural ﬁnance to improve our understanding on the stock market’s reaction to news. Mian and Sankaraguruswamy
(2012) show that market-wide sentiment affects how ﬁrm-speciﬁc earnings surprises are impounded into ﬁrms’ stock prices.
Unlike Mian and Sankaraguruswamy (2012), we analyze the impact of market-wide news, stemming from shifts in monetary
policy, on the aggregate market price response conditional on sentiment states.
1 For example, Shleifer and Summers (1990) deﬁne investor sentiment as beliefs that are not justiﬁed by fundamental news. In a similar fashion, Kumar and

ice response conditional on sentiment states.
1 For example, Shleifer and Summers (1990) deﬁne investor sentiment as beliefs that are not justiﬁed by fundamental news. In a similar fashion, Kumar and
Lee (2006) describe sentiment as the common directional component in investors’ trading beyond that attributable to fundamental news.
2 According to the dividend discount model, shifts in monetary policy can affect stock prices through changes in the rates that market participants use to
discount future cash ﬂows, and through changes in the expected cash ﬂows. Using a return variance decomposition framework, Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)
demonstrate the importance of revisions in expected returns, that is, discount rate news, in explaining the impact of monetary policy surprises on th e stock
market.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
2

Second, our work is related to the broader literature on state dependence in the relationship between stock returns and
monetary policy surprises. Previous studies highlight the role of recessions and bear markets as drivers of the state depen-
dence. Perez-Quiros and Timmermann (2000) and Basistha and Kurov (2008) show that the stock market effect of policy sur-
prises is stronger during recessions, while Chen (2007),Jansen and Tsai (2010) , Kurov (2010),Li (2015) ﬁnd that it is stronger
during bear markets. 3 Importantly, we show that the effect of sentiment is not driven by recessions, casting doubt on potential
explanations that are related to the state of the economy. 4
Importantly, the mechanism that we propose, and empirically support, generates state dependence that is distinct to
what Kurov (2010) and the other related studies identify. Our interest, both from a conceptual and methodological view-
point, is not on bull/bear markets per se, but on the correction phases that follow bullish periods of overvaluation and high
sentiment. While these periods play a key role in the well-established literature on the links between sentiment and stock
market predictability ( Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Stambaugh et al., 2012; Chung et al., 2012 ), they
have been largely ignored by studies on the relationship between monetary policy and the stock market. As Greenspan

, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Stambaugh et al., 2012; Chung et al., 2012 ), they
have been largely ignored by studies on the relationship between monetary policy and the stock market. As Greenspan
(2009) remarks, discussing the links between monetary policy and ﬁnancial markets,‘‘We have never successfully modelled
the transition from euphoria to fear”. By construction, our sentiment-waning phases measure is designed to capture the
notion of transition from overvaluation inherent in our conceptual framework, as described in Section 2.
To better understand the link between bull/bear markets and sentiment-waning phases, and highlight our contribution,
we should point out the well-established view that sentiment is high during bull markets and low during bear markets
(Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Mian and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012 ). Crucially, however, correction phases and bear market epi-
sodes are unlikely to exhibit a perfect association. For instance. sentiment can decline from a high level but not necessarily to
the low point of a bear market. In support of this argument, the correlation between frequently used bear market indicators
and sentiment-waning phases is low. Moreover, we use two alternative empirical approaches, including a new orthogoniza-
tion scheme that disentangles the effect of bear markets from sentiment-waning phases, and show that our evidence on the
distinct role of sentiment-waning phases is robust.

ncluding a new orthogoniza-
tion scheme that disentangles the effect of bear markets from sentiment-waning phases, and show that our evidence on the
distinct role of sentiment-waning phases is robust. Thus, overall, there are important conceptual and methodological differ-
ences with previous studies on state dependence in the stock market reaction to monetary policy shocks. Our empirical ﬁnd-
ings are novel and shed new light on the links between monetary policy, sentiment and the stock market.
Third, the use of intraday data allows us to demonstrate that our results are not confounded by the pre-FOMC announce-
ment drift ( Lucca and Moench, 2015 ) or by the leakage of news during the embargo period ( Bernile et al., 2016; Kurov et al.,
2019). Removing unscheduled FOMC meetings that are typically associated with the Fed responding to emergencies
(Ozdagli, 2017; Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2017 ) does not alter our key ﬁndings regarding the importance of
sentiment-waning phases. In addition, our evidence is robust to removing FOMC meetings that strongly reﬂect the Fed infor-
mation effect ( Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018; Lunsford, 2020; Jarocin ´ ski and Karadi, 2020; Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco,
2021; Bauer and Swanson, 2021 ).
Finally, our ﬁndings relate to work on the risk-taking channel of monetary policy. In theoretical models of the risk-taking

Karadi, 2020; Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco,
2021; Bauer and Swanson, 2021 ).
Finally, our ﬁndings relate to work on the risk-taking channel of monetary policy. In theoretical models of the risk-taking
channel, a reduction in the policy rate causes higher risk-taking by ﬁnancial institutions, resulting in lower risk premia and
amplifying the magnitude of the interest rate cut. These models highlight the role of leverage ( Adrian and Shin, 2010 ), fund-
ing conditions (Drechsler et al., 2018), and institutional frictions ( Acharya and Naqvi, 2019). Supporting the risk-taking chan-
nel, previous empirical studies show that there is a greater propensity for risky investments by banks, mutual funds, pension
funds and other ﬁnancial institutions when monetary policy is expansive ( Dell’Ariccia et al., 2017; Di Maggio and
Kacperczyk, 2017 ). Besides, empirical evidence demonstrates that expansionary surprises reduce risk aversion ( Bekaert
et al., 2013 ) and the equity premium ( Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005 ).5 These studies tend to ignore behavioural factors, while
we demonstrate the importance of the state of investor sentiment.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the framework that links sentiment with the reaction of
stocks to monetary policy news. Section 3 describes the measurement of monetary policy news and investor sentiment
states. Section 4 presents evidence related to the role of investor sentiment in the transmission of monetary policy news

on 3 describes the measurement of monetary policy news and investor sentiment
states. Section 4 presents evidence related to the role of investor sentiment in the transmission of monetary policy news
to the stock market and discusses potential explanations. Section 5 presents the results from various robustness checks.
Finally, Section 6 concludes.
2. Conceptual framework
Our conceptual framework hinges on the idea of mispricing, which is subsequently corrected, and the links between pol-
icy, fear alleviation and stock market returns during such periods when sentiment wanes. To develop it, we start by deﬁning
investor sentiment as non-fundamental beliefs, that is beliefs held by investors about future cash ﬂows and discount rates
3 There is also empirical evidence suggesting that monetary policy surprises inﬂuence investor sentiment ( Lutz, 2015 ), especially during bear markets
(Kurov, 2010 ).
4 Two other related studies are those by Garcia (2013) and Cenesizoglu (2014) , who also argue that investors’ sensitivity to news is state dependent. In
Garcia’s (2013) analysis, however, this is related to the state of the business cycle, with the sensitivity being stronger during recessions. Similarly, in
Cenesizoglu (2014) it is the underlying state of the economy that matters.
5 Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) attribute a large part of the positive stock market effect of monetary stimulus to a lower equity premium. They point out that

erlying state of the economy that matters.
5 Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) attribute a large part of the positive stock market effect of monetary stimulus to a lower equity premium. They point out that
a lower premium could reﬂect a reduction in the riskiness of stocks, e.g., through improvements in ﬁrms’ balance sheets, and an increase in the willing ness of
stock market investors to bear risk. The latter mechanism may operate through expected consumption, as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) .
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
3

that are not justiﬁed by existing facts ( Shleifer and Summers, 1990; Kumar and Lee, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2007 ). In con-
trast to classical ﬁnance theory, where investors are rational and stock prices reﬂect fundamentals, i.e. the rationally dis-
counted present value of expected cash ﬂows, in behavioural ﬁnance mispricing can occur. When sentiment is high,
optimistic valuations combine with limits to arbitrage leading to episodes of overpricing ( De Long et al., 1990; Shleifer
and Vishny, 1997; Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Shiller, 2016 ). During such periods, there is greater participation of
sentiment-driven traders in the markets, moving prices away from levels that would otherwise be consistent with a positive
mean–variance tradeoff ( Yu and Yuan, 2011 ).
The extant literature also widely documents that sentiment-induced mispricing tends to be corrected during sentiment-
waning phases ( Huang et al., 2015 ), with the extent of pricing correction varying across different categories of stocks ( Baker
and Wurgler, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Stambaugh et al., 2012 ). We argue that since most investors have long posi-
tions (Gervais and Odean, 2001), they become anxious and fearful during the pricing correction as they face losses and uncer-
tainty about exposure to future losses. The links between anxiety, fear and uncertainty are well-established in the
psychology literature (Ortony et al., 1990; Gino et al., 2012; Garcia, 2013 ).

cer-
tainty about exposure to future losses. The links between anxiety, fear and uncertainty are well-established in the
psychology literature (Ortony et al., 1990; Gino et al., 2012; Garcia, 2013 ).
6 The central hypothesis we propose is that through
expansionary monetary policy shocks the Fed can boost the stock market during sentiment-waning phases by alleviating inves-
tors’ fear.
3. Data and methodology
3.1. Monetary policy news
Before the recent ﬁnancial crisis, Open Market Operations (OMOs) were the key policy tool that the Fed used to achieve its
operating target for the FFR, the interest rate on overnight loans of reserves between banks ( Bernanke and Mihov, 1998 ).7
Our sample commences on June 1989. Before 1994, there were no press releases regarding FOMC decisions and market partic-
ipants had to infer whether the FOMC had taken a policy action from the signals provided by the size and type of OMOs that
followed each meeting. We use the dates provided by Kuttner (2003) to identify event dates prior to February 1994, while for
the rest of the sample we use the FOMC meeting dates, obtained from: http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc-
calendars.htm. In a development that enhanced transparency, on February 1994 the Fed commenced the practice of issuing
a statement on the day that the FOMC meeting is concluded to inform market participants about an interest rate change.

nhanced transparency, on February 1994 the Fed commenced the practice of issuing
a statement on the day that the FOMC meeting is concluded to inform market participants about an interest rate change.
Some of the FOMC meetings in our sample are unscheduled, taking place between the 8 regular meetings each year. In
total, 18 out of the 26 unscheduled meetings occurred before 1994, while the remaining ones are typically associated with
episodes of ﬁnancial turmoil in the post-1994 period.
8 In line with Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005 and several other related stud-
ies, we exclude from the baseline estimation sample the unscheduled FOMC meeting that occurred in the ﬁrst day of trading (17
September 2001) following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks. Moreover, we remove the most prominent outlier, as iden-
tiﬁed by the difference in the ﬁts statistic of Welsch and Kuh (1977) , that corresponds to the unscheduled FOMC meeting on 22
January 2008. 9
Using the methodology proposed by Kuttner (2001), we isolate the unexpected component of changes in the FFR ( Diu
t )o n
day t when the FOMC meeting takes place:
Diu
t ¼ D
D /C0 t ðf
0
m;t /C0 f
0
m;t/C0 1Þ ð1Þ
where f
0
m;t is the current-month implied futures rate (100 minus the FFR futures contract price), and D is the number of days
in the month. 10
This measure of monetary policy surprises captures revisions in expectations about the FFR using the price change in the

the FFR futures contract price), and D is the number of days
in the month. 10
This measure of monetary policy surprises captures revisions in expectations about the FFR using the price change in the
30-day Federal funds futures contract relative to the day preceding the policy action. FFR expectations embedded in futures
6 Furthermore, narrative evidence in Table A2 of the Online Appendix indicates that during such sentiment-waning phases worries about negative marke t
psychology featured prominently in the deliberations of the Fed. For example, discussing developments that followed the burst of the ‘‘dot-com” bub ble,
Greenspan (2008) explicitly links the correction with increased fear.
7 OMOs involve buying or selling U.S. government securities (primarily short-term Treasuries) either outright, with the aim of altering monetary pol icy
(dynamic OMOs), or through daily repurchase and sale-repurchase agreements, targeted towards smoothing temporary ﬂuctuations in the monetary bas e.
Monetary policy decisions are taken by the FOMC and implemented by the Open Market Trading Desk of the New York Fed. For example, to reduce the FFR, the
Fed buys securities, thereby adding to the stock of bank reserves and reducing the need of banks to borrow reserves from each other.
8 Table A1 in the Online Appendix lists unscheduled FOMC meetings, while Table A2 provides examples of ﬁnancial turmoil periods around unscheduled
meetings.

banks to borrow reserves from each other.
8 Table A1 in the Online Appendix lists unscheduled FOMC meetings, while Table A2 provides examples of ﬁnancial turmoil periods around unscheduled
meetings.
9 On 22 January 2008 the market declined by almost 1%, in spite of a massive FFR cut of 75 basis points, almost all of which was unexpected. In a similar
fashion, on 17 September 2001 the market plummeted despite a large FFR cut. In the robustness checks, we show in Table A9 that using an estimation method
which is robust to the presence of outliers, the main results hold when the two aforementioned events are included in the estimation sample. In Section 4.3.3
we further analyze the role of unscheduled meetings.
10 Following Kuttner (2001), when the FOMC meeting falls on one of the last three days of the month, the unscaled change in the one-month futures rate ( f 1
m;t –
f 1
m;t/C0 1 ) is used to calculate the FFR surprise. Also, when the FOMC meeting occurs on the ﬁrst day of the month, f 1
m/C0 1;D , instead of f 0
m;t/C0 1 , is used to measure the
surprise. These contracts are cash settled against the average daily effective FFR for the delivery month. Hence, the implied surprise is adjusted by a factor
related to the number of days in the month affected by the policy change. The source of the futures data is Bloomberg, while the FFR data is obtained from t he
Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED) maintained by the St. Louis Fed.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A.

change. The source of the futures data is Bloomberg, while the FFR data is obtained from t he
Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED) maintained by the St. Louis Fed.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
4

contracts have some key advantages over alternative proxies, such as immunity to model selection issues ( Kuttner, 2001 ).
They tend to outperform forecasts based on sophisticated time-series models, monetary policy rules and forecasts obtained
using other ﬁnancial market instruments ( Evans, 1998; Gürkaynak et al., 2007 ). Moreover, focusing on one-day changes in
near-dated Fed funds futures on the day of a monetary policy announcement is important to ‘‘difference out” predictable risk
premia (Piazzesi and Swanson, 2008 ). The emphasis on monetary policy surprises is in line with the idea that the market is
not likely to react to anticipated actions since these should already be incorporated in stock prices prior to the FOMC
announcement ( Ozdagli, 2017 ). The futures market-based proxy of policy surprises has been extensively used in previous
event studies that analyze the response of stock prices to monetary policy shifts ( Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005;
Kontonikas et al., 2013; Ozdagli, 2017 ).11
Fig. 1 plots actual and unexpected changes in the target FFR on FOMC meeting dates. It shows that large expansionary
monetary policy surprises, as reﬂected in unexpected declines in the FFR, typically occur during, or near, periods of economic
slowdown. In October 2008, in the aftermath of the Lehman Brother’s collapse, the Fed reduced the target FFR from 2% to 1%.
This was followed by another major cut in the FFR at the FOMC meeting on 16 December 2008, from 1% to the range of 0%–

of the Lehman Brother’s collapse, the Fed reduced the target FFR from 2% to 1%.
This was followed by another major cut in the FFR at the FOMC meeting on 16 December 2008, from 1% to the range of 0%–
0.25%. Since then and until the end of the sample period, there are no further rate changes and the volatility of FFR surprises
dies out. Therefore, our estimation for the impact of FFR surprises on the stock market focuses on the period before the ZLB
(June 1989 - December 2008). Table 1 reports that the average FFR change in the pre-ZLB period is /C0 0.05%, ranging from a
minimum of /C0 0.75% to a maximum of 0.75%. There are 82 FOMC meetings that are associated with FFR changes, 51 of which
are of expansionary nature (
Di < 0), while 31 are contractionary ( Di > 0). On average, target rate surprises are expansionary,
with 30 cases of unexpected FFR decline of 10 basis points, or more.
3.2. Investor sentiment states
For our baseline analysis, we use the U.S. Conference Board’s Conﬁdence Index (CCI), obtained from the OECD database, to
proxy for investor sentiment. The CCI is a consumer survey-based sentiment index, measured outside the ﬁnancial markets.
It relies on surveys conducted by the Conference Board in which 5,000 randomly selected U.S. households are asked ques-
tions about their outlook on the economy. 12 It has been used by Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006),Ho and Hung (2009) and
Antoniou et al. (2013) , among others, to measure investor sentiment.

asked ques-
tions about their outlook on the economy. 12 It has been used by Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006),Ho and Hung (2009) and
Antoniou et al. (2013) , among others, to measure investor sentiment. Fisher and Statman (2003) report positive correlations
between consumer conﬁdence and measures of bullishness of individual investors about the stock market. In the robustness
analysis, we employ two alternative measures, Baker and Wurgler’s (2006, 2007) Sentiment Index (BWI), and the the University
of Michigan’s Consumer Sentiment Index (CSI). Our ﬁndings remain robust to the use of different measures of sentiment.
To distinguish between behavioral and rational explanations for the relationship between monetary policy and stock
returns, the effects of business cycle variation should be removed from the sentiment proxy. To achieve this, we follow
Baker and Wurgler (2006) who orthogonalize each of the constituent variables of their sentiment index with respect to a
set of macroeconomic variables. 13 Speciﬁcally, we orthogonalize the CCI by regressing it on the same set of macroeconomic
variables that BW used. The residuals from this regression capture sentiment (optimism or pessimism) that is not justiﬁed
by economic fundamentals ( Lemmon and Portniaguina, 2006 ). The orthogonalized CCI is standardized so that it has zero mean
and unit variance.
The time-series plot of the orthogonalized CCI sentiment index in Fig. 2 (left-hand panel) is consistent with mean-

The orthogonalized CCI is standardized so that it has zero mean
and unit variance.
The time-series plot of the orthogonalized CCI sentiment index in Fig. 2 (left-hand panel) is consistent with mean-
reverting behaviour. Following episodes of exuberance, a correction phase ensues, during which sentiment declines
(Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Yu and Yuan, 2011; Chung et al., 2012 ). Having reached a low point, sentiment tends to recover.
The late 1990s - early 2000s boom-bust cycle provides an illustrative example. Speciﬁcally, the ebullience of the late 1990s is
related to the ‘‘dot-com” boom and cannot be fully accounted by economic developments. AsShiller (2016) characteristically
points out, ‘‘Greenspan’s irrational exuberance speech in 1996 came near to the beginning of what may be called the biggest
historical example to date of a speculative upsurge in the stock market. The stock market increase from 1994 to 2000 could
not obviously be justiﬁed in any reasonable terms. Basic economic indicators did not come close to tripling” (p.2). 14
Following the culmination of the ‘‘dot-com” boom, the CCI sentiment index starts to decline by around year 2001, with
further declines in 2002. By construction, this fall in orthogonalized sentiment was above and beyond what was warranted
by the brief recession of 2001. Crucially, the speed of mean reversion in sentiment is rather low. Visual inspection of the CCI

all in orthogonalized sentiment was above and beyond what was warranted
by the brief recession of 2001. Crucially, the speed of mean reversion in sentiment is rather low. Visual inspection of the CCI
11 Fed funds futures are also commonly employed by both market participants and policymakers to gauge FFR expectations. See, for example, the 2005 Feder al
Reserve Monetary Policy Report to Congress (https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2005/July/fullreport.htm) and Bernanke (2015) .
12 For each question, scores are calculated as the ratio of the number of favorable replies, divided by the sum of favorable and unfavorable replies. The C CI is
then generated by aggregating the scores on the different questions.
13 The set of macro-variables include the growth in industrial production, the real growth in durable, nondurable and services consumption, the growth in
employment, and a dummy variable that indicates recessions as classiﬁed by NBER business cycle dates. This approach is also used by other studies to re move
business cycle information from sentiment indicators ( Yu and Yuan, 2011; McLean and Zhao, 2014 )
14 Shiller (2016) deﬁnes irrational exuberance as a recurrent social phenomenon whereby prices are bid up to unusually high and unsustainable levels under
the inﬂuence of market psychology. Alan Greenspan, Fed Chairman at that time, was concerned about the high valuations. In his autobiography, Greensp an

o unusually high and unsustainable levels under
the inﬂuence of market psychology. Alan Greenspan, Fed Chairman at that time, was concerned about the high valuations. In his autobiography, Greensp an
dates the birth of the ‘‘dot-com” boom to August 1995, when Netscape, ‘‘a tiny, two-year old software maker in Silicon Valley that had almost no revenue s and
not a penny of proﬁts”, was ﬂoated on the Nasdaq, with its price more than doubling on the ﬁrst day of trading ( Greenspan, 2008, p.164). The boom intensiﬁed
in the late 1990s and Greenspan argues that even rising productivity could not explain the very high valuations. Other academic work in support of a ‘‘d ot-com”
bubble includes, for instance, Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) .
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
5

Fig. 1. Conventional monetary policy surprises This ﬁgure plots actual (dotted line) and unexpected FFR changes (solid line) on scheduled and
unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008. Shaded areas denote U.S recessions as classiﬁed by NBER business cycle dates.
Table 1
Descriptive statistics for monetary policy surprises Dit and Diu
t denote FFR target rate changes and unexpected changes, respectively, on scheduled and
unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings.
Obs Min Max Mean St.Dev.
Panel A: All meetings
Dit 181 /C0 0.75 0.75 /C0 0.05 0.23
Diu
t 181 /C0 0.42 0.17 /C0 0.03 0.09
Panel B: Contractionary
Dit > 0 31 0.25 0.75 0.30 0.12
Diu
t > 0 46 0.01 0.17 0.05 0.04
Panel C: Expansionary
Dit < 05 1 /C0 0.75 /C0 0.25 /C0 0.34 0.14
Diu
t < 08 0 /C0 0.42 /C0 0.01 /C0 0.09 0.09
Panel D: No change
Dit =0 99 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Diu
t ¼ 0 55 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Fig. 2. Orthogonalized sentiment index and sentiment-waning phases The left-hand panel of this ﬁgure plots the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index (CCI)
using monthly data over the period June 1989 - December 2008. The right-hand panel plots the associated changes-based sentiment states, as captured b y
SHD
t , on scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008
unscheduled meetings. SHD

nt states, as captured b y
SHD
t , on scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008
unscheduled meetings. SHD
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then
declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the
previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. Shaded areas
denote the U.S recessions as classiﬁed by NBER business cycle dates.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
6

series in Fig. 2 suggests that it is highly persistent. Quantitatively, the estimated AR(1) coefﬁcient from a regression of
monthly CCI on a constant and its ﬁrst lag over January 1989 - December 2008 is 0.9. The implied half-life estimate is
7 months.15 Consequently, it takes considerable time to move from peaks to troughs in sentiment. Narrative evidence by Baker
and Wurgler (2006, 2007), stretching back to the 1960s, suggests the presence of long-lasting boom-bust cycles in sentiment.
In order to examine whether the effect of monetary policy shifts on stock market price is conditional on the state of inves-
tor sentiment, we construct two alternative classiﬁcations of sentiment states. With both methods, we keep the state of sen-
timent ﬁxed throughout the year. 16 The choice of whole-year classiﬁcation is a common approach, widely adopted in the
previous literature. For example, Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Baker et al. (2012) classify the twelve months within each sam-
ple year as being in the high (start-of-year) sentiment regime when evaluating the stock market patterns following high sen-
timent periods. In a similar fashion, Yu and Yuan (2011) classify each year based on the end of prior year’s sentiment, before
they analyse the impact of sentiment regimes on the mean–variance relationship.
Starting from the ﬁrst classiﬁcation, we use a dummy variable which is calculated using the level of the orthogonalized
sentiment indexes. The dummy variable, SH

es on the mean–variance relationship.
Starting from the ﬁrst classiﬁcation, we use a dummy variable which is calculated using the level of the orthogonalized
sentiment indexes. The dummy variable, SH
t , is equal to 1 (0) if the FOMC meeting occurs during those years that start with
high (low) sentiment level. In line with Baker and Wurgler (2006) , we deﬁne a year as starting with high (low) sentiment if
the sentiment indicator in December of the previous year is above (below) the full sample mean value (see also, Yu and Yuan,
2011; and Chung et al., 2012 ). In our empirical analysis, this dummy captures the effects of monetary policy surprises fol-
lowing periods of high sentiment.
The mean-reverting nature of sentiment motivates the construction of a variable that captures the optimism waning
phases following periods of exuberance. This second measure of sentiment states, SHD
t , is novel and accounts for the joint
effect of the sentiment’s level and changes on the reaction of the stock market price to FFR surprises. It is a dummy variable
that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurs during a year when sentiment starts at a high level but then declines, and 0
otherwise. Speciﬁcally, a year is deﬁned as starting with high sentiment which subsequently declines if the sentiment proxy
in December of the previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy in December of that year is
lower than in December of the previous year.

ly declines if the sentiment proxy
in December of the previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy in December of that year is
lower than in December of the previous year.
There are ten years associated with sentiment-waning phases ( SHD
t ¼ 1). Fig. 2 (right-hand panel) plots the changes-based
states (see also Table A2 in the Online Appendix). With the exception of 2001 and 2007–2008, sentiment-waning years do
not encompass recessionary episodes, highlighting the rather distinct nature of sentiment-waning episodes. The correlation
coefﬁcient between sentiment-waning phases and recessions is close to zero (0.08) and statistically insigniﬁcant. Finally, the
correlation between the level and changes-based states is high (0.76) but not perfect, reﬂecting the fact that there are periods
of exuberance, when sentiment is already high and keeps increasing, e.g. 1996–1997. Thus, by construction, SHD
t is better sui-
ted to capture the notion of mean-reversion inherent in our conceptual framework as well as in previous studies, such as
Baker and Wurgler (2006) , that nevertheless use level-type measures of sentiment states. For completion, we use both
approaches throughout the paper.
4. Econometric models and results
This section contains event study estimates of the stock market response to monetary policy actions. Section 4.1 analyzes
the impact of monetary policy surprises over the sample period June 1989 - December 2008, while Section 4.2 considers our

of the stock market response to monetary policy actions. Section 4.1 analyzes
the impact of monetary policy surprises over the sample period June 1989 - December 2008, while Section 4.2 considers our
proposed explanation, and Section 4.3 discusses alternative explanations.
4.1. The impact of monetary policy surprises
We begin our empirical investigation by examining the response of stock market returns to target FFR surprises on FOMC
announcement days conditional on the start-of-the-year level of sentiment. To this end, we introduce an interaction term of
the FFR surprise with the previously deﬁned level-based sentiment dummy, SH
t , in the following regression model:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiu
t þ b2SH
t Diu
t þ et ð2Þ
where Rt denotes the daily CRSP value-weighted return in the event space between the end of the FOMC announcement day,
t, and the end of the previous trading day, t /C0 1. We also use CRSP equally-weighted returns.
Panel A of Table 2 reports OLS estimates of Eq. 2 with Huber–White heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors. The
stock market reaction to unexpected FFR changes when sentiment is high at the beginning of the year ( SH
t ¼ 1), as captured
by b2, is signiﬁcant, both economically and statistically. The negative sign of b2 indicates that the stock market responds pos-
itively (negatively) to monetary easing (tightening) surprises. The results imply an about 0.7% one-day stock market return

ally. The negative sign of b2 indicates that the stock market responds pos-
itively (negatively) to monetary easing (tightening) surprises. The results imply an about 0.7% one-day stock market return
in response to an unexpected cut of 10 basis points in the FFR, following periods of high sentiment. On the other hand, when
15 Given an AR(1) model, yt ¼ a þ /yt/C0 1 þ ut , the half-life is calculated as: ln ð0:5Þ= lnðj/jÞ. The half-life reﬂects the time horizon that the process takes, on
average, to halve its distance from the mean. Similar pattern of slow mean-reversion is observed in the alternative sentiment measures (see Figure A1 in the
Online Appendix). The implied half-life estimates for the other measures fall between 4 months (CSI) and 1.5 years (BWI).
16 Our results are robust to using a shorter horizon of 6 months to classify the sentiment states (results available upon request).
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
7

sentiment is low at the start of the year the market response to FFR surprises, as captured by b1, is statistically insigniﬁcant.
To formally examine whether the impact of FFR surprises on stock returns is equal across sentiment states, we conduct a
Wald test for equality of the relevant coefﬁcients ( b1=b2). The test rejects the null hypothesis at the 1% level of signiﬁcance
(p-value = 0). Thus, our ﬁndings highlight that the impact of monetary policy news is stronger following periods of high
sentiment.17
As discussed earlier, sentiment exhibits a mean-reverting property, whereby exuberance tends to be followed by a cor-
rection phase, generating negative changes in sentiment. This prompts us to examine whether sentiment-waning phases
affect the stock price response to FFR surprises. Therefore, we replace the sentiment level-based dummy variable with
the changes-based dummy, SHD
t , and then re-estimate Eq. 2. The results, presented in Panel B of Table 2, reveal that the stock
market responds signiﬁcantly to FFR surprises during years when sentiment starts at high level but then subsequently decli-
nes ( SHD
t ¼ 1), as captured by b2. Estimates of b2, are somewhat larger in magnitude than those reported in Panel A. Specif-
ically, the stock market responds to an unexpected FFR cut of 10 basis points by 0.8% one-day return during sentiment-
waning phases. In contrast, b1 estimates reveal that the impact of monetary policy news on the stock market is insigniﬁcant

xpected FFR cut of 10 basis points by 0.8% one-day return during sentiment-
waning phases. In contrast, b1 estimates reveal that the impact of monetary policy news on the stock market is insigniﬁcant
during other periods. Again, the Wald test for equality of coefﬁcients ( b1=b2) strongly rejects the null hypothesis. All in all,
replacing the level-based with the changes-based measure of sentiment states we provides further evidence on the impor-
tant role of sentiment in the transmission of monetary policy surprises to the stock market.
We also employ an alternative starting point for the sample period. We use February 1994, that is, the time when the Fed
started to announce its policy actions, representing a shift that enhanced transparency in monetary policy making. The
results in Table 2 are similar to those from using the sample that begins in June 1989. During sentiment correction phases,
the estimate of b2 is /C0 8.21 for June 1989 start and /C0 8.55 for February 1994 start. We further consider a full 4-way decom-
position in which we use related dummy variables to classify periods of ‘‘high & increasing”, ‘‘high & decreasing”, ‘‘low &
increasing”, and ‘‘low & decreasing” sentiment. The ﬁndings (available upon request) are consistent with those reported
in Table 2 , and show that the response of the stock market price to FFR surprises is statistically signiﬁcant only when sen-

. The ﬁndings (available upon request) are consistent with those reported
in Table 2 , and show that the response of the stock market price to FFR surprises is statistically signiﬁcant only when sen-
timent is high at the start of the year but then falls, as in the 2000–2002 period, for instance. On the other hand, during
phases of exuberance (pessimism) when sentiment is already high (low) and keeps increasing (decreasing), for example dur-
ing 1996–1997 (1990–1991), the effect of monetary policy news on the stock market is statistically insigniﬁcant. The same
holds for periods of recovery, when sentiment is low at the start of the year but then rises. In sum, our ﬁndings highlight the
limited effect of expansionary FFR surprises on the stock market when pessimism prevails. 18
Overall, our evidence points to a behavioral perspective. This is because a rational pricing explanation would predict no
difference in the stock market return response to policy shocks between different states of investor sentiment. In a similar
vein, Yu and Yuan (2011) show that greater participation of sentiment traders in high sentiment period results in the dis-
appearance of return-risk relation, and argue that it is hard to explain their results with the traditional asset pricing theories.
Table 2
Response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment Panel A of this table presents OLS estimates with

th the traditional asset pricing theories.
Table 2
Response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment Panel A of this table presents OLS estimates with
Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: Rt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiu
t +b2 SH
t Diu
t +et , where Rt
and Diu
t denote CRSP market returns and unexpected FFR changes, respectively. SH
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 (0) if the FOMC meeting occurred
during a year that starts with high (low) sentiment level. A year is deﬁned as starting with high (low) sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (Decem ber) of
the previous year is above (below) the full sample mean value. Panel B of this table replaces SH
t in the above equation with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to
1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but
then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy a t
the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index. The 1989-start sample period
includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008
unscheduled meetings.

dex. The 1989-start sample period
includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008
unscheduled meetings. The 1994-start sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over February 1994 - December 2008, with the
exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. /C3 ; /C3/C3 , and /C3/C3/C3 indicate statistical
signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
1989 start 1994 start
Obs b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2 j Obs b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2
Panel A: SH
t
181 0 :22/C3/C3 /C0 0.55 /C0 7:38/C3/C3/C3 0.15 j 126 0 :28/C3/C3 /C0 2.01 /C0 7:52/C3/C3/C3 0.16
(0.09) (0.95) (2.29) j (0.12) (2.08) (2.50)
Panel B: SHD
t
181 0 :23/C3/C3 /C0 0.27 /C0 8:21/C3/C3/C3 0.17 j 126 0 :29/C3/C3 /C0 0.62 /C0 8:55/C3/C3/C3 0.19
(0.09) (0.94) (2.28) j (0.11) (1.84) (2.48)
17 Using equally-weighted market returns, the magnitude of the effect of FFR surprises following periods of high sentiment, declines by about a third as
compared with the case of value-weighed returns. Nevertheless, the effect remains sizeable and statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the market respons e to target rate
surprises is not exclusively driven by the reaction of large stocks. Finally, using a pre-crisis sample (June 1989 - August 2007), we obtain similar re sults for
value- and equally-weighted returns (available upon request).

vely driven by the reaction of large stocks. Finally, using a pre-crisis sample (June 1989 - August 2007), we obtain similar re sults for
value- and equally-weighted returns (available upon request).
18 Our evidence is also consistent with the notion that the Fed is not able to rein in bubbles with incremental tightening in times of exuberance. As Greenspan
(2008) points out, a massive interest rate hike, say by 10%, would be a different story but would generate large collateral damage and therefore is not typical ly
considered as an option by the Fed.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
8

4.1.1. Alternative econometric speciﬁcations
We consider several alternative econometric speciﬁcations to Eq. 2. We start with a permutation of the baseline model
which uses ‘‘raw” data on lagged sentiment, as opposed to dummy variables capturing sentiment states (see also Mian
and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012 ). Moreover, it accounts for the possibility that returns at the event frequency are affected
by past (start of the year) sentiment:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1St/C0 1 þ b2Diu
t þ b3St/C0 1Diu
t þ et ð3Þ
where St/C0 1 denotes the sentiment value at the end (December) of the previous year and all other variables are as previously
deﬁned.
Panel A in Table 3 reports estimates of Eq. 3. The coefﬁcient of interest, b3, indicates that when past sentiment is higher,
the stock market reaction to unexpected FFR changes is stronger. Hence, the evidence is consistent with our baseline ﬁnd-
ings. Lagged sentiment on its own, as captured by b1, is typically statistically insigniﬁcant. We also use another speciﬁcation
which replaces St/C0 1 with SHD
t . The resulting model is similar to Eq. 2, apart from that the sentiment-related variable is also
included as an intercept dummy. The results in Panel B of Table 3 are consistent with those in Panel A since b3 is highly sig-
niﬁcant, highlighting the importance of sentiment states for the reaction of the stock market to policy surprises, while the
‘‘intercept effect” of sentiment, reﬂected by b1, is insigniﬁcant.

ly sig-
niﬁcant, highlighting the importance of sentiment states for the reaction of the stock market to policy surprises, while the
‘‘intercept effect” of sentiment, reﬂected by b1, is insigniﬁcant.
Moreover, we consider an alternative deﬁnition of the sentiment states indicator that does not utilize information on
future developments. Speciﬁcally, for the alternative SH
t , when evaluating whether sentiment is high (or low) at the start
of a given year we compare it with the average sentiment calculated using data up to the end of the previous year, as
opposed to the full sample mean; e.g., using data up to 2004 for the case of 2005. In other words, we use an expanding win-
dow for the calculation of mean sentiment. The start of the window is set to January 1984. Panel C in Table 3 reports esti-
mates of Eq. 2 using the alternative sentiment states measure. The results are consistent with the baseline ﬁndings in Table 2.
Thus, overall, the main ﬁndings regarding the role of sentiment in the relationship between monetary policy shocks and
stock returns are robust to the use of alternative econometric speciﬁcations.
4.1.2. Policy asymmetry
Eq. 2 assumes a symmetric stock market reaction to monetary policy surprises with no distinction between expansionary
and contractionary surprises. It is plausible that the stock market response may depend on the type of news, as classiﬁed by
the sign of the monetary policy shock.

no distinction between expansionary
and contractionary surprises. It is plausible that the stock market response may depend on the type of news, as classiﬁed by
the sign of the monetary policy shock. Previous evidence by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) provides only weak support for
this type of asymmetry. Ozdagli and Weber (2017) , on the other hand, provide evidence in line with a more important role
of expansionary surprises. However, these studies do not consider sentiment states. To gain more insight on potential policy
asymmetries, we augment Eq. 2 and estimate the following regression model that allows for both sentiment dependence and
sign asymmetry:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiun
t þ b2ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiup
t þ b3SH
t Diun
t þ b4SH
t Diup
t þ et ð4Þ
where Diun
t and Diup
t
denote negative and positive unexpected FFR target rate changes, respectively. The negative FFR surprise
is deﬁned as: Diun
t ¼ Diu
t
Dn
t , where Dn
t is a dummy variable equal to 1 if Diu
t < 0, and 0 otherwise. Likewise, the positive FFR
surprise is: Diup
t ¼ Diu
t
Dp
t , where Dp
t is a dummy variable equal to 1 if Diu
t > 0, and 0 otherwise.
Panel A of Table 4 reports estimates of Eq. 4. We ﬁnd that looser-than-expected monetary policy has a strong effect on
stock market returns. Crucially, this effect appears only following periods of high sentiment as captured by b3 , which is neg-
ative and signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

tary policy has a strong effect on
stock market returns. Crucially, this effect appears only following periods of high sentiment as captured by b3 , which is neg-
ative and signiﬁcant at the 1% level. On the other hand, the effect of tighter-than-expected policy is always statistically
insigniﬁcant, irrespectively of the state of investor sentiment. Hence, the stock market response to monetary policy news
is highly asymmetric, driven by expansionary surprises, and at the same time conditional on investor sentiment. Moving
on to the changes-based sentiment indicator, the results in Panel B of Table 4 imply that the effect of monetary stimulus
is mostly potent when sentiment goes through a correction phase. Importantly, our ﬁndings are not reﬂecting the concen-
tration of policy surprises in a particular sentiment state as expansionary and tightening surprises occur across both senti-
ment states (see Table A3 in the Online Appendix).
4.2. Sentiment, monetary policy and fear alleviation
Monetary policy easing news may affect the stock market by alleviating investors’ fear. Following Bekaert et al. (2013),w e
use a decomposition of the option-implied expected volatility on the S&P500 index (VIX) to capture investors’ fear. The VIX
index, commonly interpreted as a ‘‘fear gauge” by ﬁnancial market participants, reﬂects both stock market uncertainty (the
‘‘physical” expected volatility) and the variance risk premium (VRP). The VRP, obtained as the difference between the

auge” by ﬁnancial market participants, reﬂects both stock market uncertainty (the
‘‘physical” expected volatility) and the variance risk premium (VRP). The VRP, obtained as the difference between the
squared VIX index and expected realized market volatility, is a strong predictor of stock returns ( Bollerslev et al., 2009;
Bekaert and Hoerova, 2014 ).19 As Bollerslev and Todorov (2011) show, fears of disasters account for a large fraction of the
VRP. They highlight that about three-quarters of the VRP may be attributed to ‘‘crash-o-phobia” (see p.2191) as opposed rational
19 In line with Bekaert et al. (2013) , we obtain an estimate of the expected future realized volatility using daily data. The squared VIX and the past realized
variance are used as predictors. We thank Nikos Vlastakis for providing us with the data.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
9

asset pricing arguments. Our analysis in Table A2 of the Online Appendix highlights two important facts. First, there appears to
be a link between VRP and investors’ fear, since the former tends to peak during sentiment-waning phases. Second, during such
periods the ﬁnancial press makes numerous references to fear and panic in the markets.
We re-estimate Eq. 2, using changes in the VRP as the dependent variable. The positive sign and statistical signiﬁcance of
b2 in Panel B of Table 5 , along with the insigniﬁcance of b1, indicate that the VRP declines in response to monetary easing
surprises only during sentiment-waning phases. The effect is driven by looser-than-expected monetary policy. 20 Thus, we
show that the link between fear alleviation and monetary stimulus that Bekaert et al. (2013) identify, is conditional upon
the state of investor sentiment. Our results also suggest a limited effect of monetary policy surprises on the stock market via
fear alleviation when pessimism prevails, that is, when sentiment declines from a level that is already low. 21
Taken together, the results in Tables 2 and 5 , along with the substantial correlation of VRP changes and stock market
returns (correlation coefﬁcient is /C0 0.57), suggest that fear alleviation by monetary stimulus during sentiment-waning peri-
ods can help to explain the stock market response to monetary policy surprises. Crucially, the capacity of sentiment to drive

that fear alleviation by monetary stimulus during sentiment-waning peri-
ods can help to explain the stock market response to monetary policy surprises. Crucially, the capacity of sentiment to drive
the state dependence in both in Tables 2 and 5 , suggests that it is hard to explain our ﬁndings using a rational story ( Yu and
Yuan, 2011 ).
Table 3
Response of stock market returns to FFR shocks conditional upon the state of investor sentiment - alternative econometric speciﬁcations Panel A of this
table presents OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following mode l: Rt =b0
+b1 St/C0 1 +b2 Diu
t +b3 St/C0 1 Diu
t + et , where Rt and Diu
t denote CRSP value-weighted market returns and unexpected FFR changes, respectively. St/C0 1 denotes the raw
sentiment value at the end (December) of the previous year. Panel B of this table replaces St/C0 1 with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting
occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing
sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that
year is lower than at the end of the previous year. Panel C of this Table reports OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standa rd errors,

the sentiment proxy at the end of that
year is lower than at the end of the previous year. Panel C of this Table reports OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standa rd errors,
over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: R
t =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SHa
t ÞDi
u
t +b2 SHa
t Di
u
t +et , where SHa
t is the alternative level-based sentiment dummy variable,
deﬁned in Section 4.1.1 of the paper. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index. The sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled F OMC
meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 Adj:R2
Panel A: Lagged sentiment
181 0 :21/C3/C3 0.10 /C0 3:95/C3/C3/C3 /C0 4:47/C3/C3/C3 0.15
(0.09) (1.13) (1.24) (1.48)
Panel B: Adding SHD
t intercept dummy
181 0.16 0.14 -0.47 /C0 7:52/C3/C3/C3 0.17
(0.10) (0.19) (1.00) (2.58)
Panel C: Alternative SH
t
181 0 :20/C3/C3 -0.25 /C0 9:16/C3/C3/C3 0.20
(0.09) (1.26) (1.56)
Table 4
Response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment - accounting for policy asymmetry This table
presents OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: Rt =b0
+b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDi
un
t + b2 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDi
up
t +b3 SH
t Di
un

estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: Rt =b0
+b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDi
un
t + b2 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDi
up
t +b3 SH
t Di
un
t +b4 SH
t Di
up
t +et , where Rt ; Di
un
t and Di
up
t
denote CRSP value-weighted market returns, negative unexpected FFR changes
and positive unexpected FFR changes, respectively. Negative FFR surprises are calculated as Di
un
t ¼ Di
u
t
Dn
t , where Dn
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if
Diu
t < 0, and 0 otherwise. Positive FFR surprises are calculated as Diup
t ¼ Diu
t
Dp
t , where Dp
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if Diu
t > 0, and 0 otherwise. SH
t is a
dummy variable that is equal to 1 (0) if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year that starts with high (low) sentiment level. A year is deﬁned as starting w ith
high (low) sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year is above (below) the full sample mean value. In Panel B we replace SH
t in
the above equation with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then
declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previ ous
year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is
the U.S.

e end (December) of the previ ous
year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is
the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index. The sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the
exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statist ical
signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2
Panel A: SH
t
181 0.03 /C0 1.31 0.35 /C0 10:11/C3/C3/C3 9.44 0.23
(0.09) (0.94) (3.78) (1.67) (6.82)
Panel B: SHD
t
181 0.07 /C0 1.13 1.28 /C0 10:50/C3/C3/C3 7.37 0.23
(0.09) (0.93) (3.74) (1.68) (8.22)
20 See Table A4 in the Online Appendix for estimates of Eq. 4, which allows for sign asymmetry in the effect of FFR surprises, replacing stock market returns
with VRP changes. The results reveal that VRP changes react to expansionary surprises, but not to tightening ones.
21 Unreported ﬁndings (available upon request) from a 4-way decomposition that considers ‘‘high & increasing”, ‘‘high & decreasing”, ‘‘low & increasing”, and
‘‘low & decreasing” sentiment reveal that VRP changes react to FFR surprises only during periods when sentiment falls from a high level.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
10

4.3. Addressing alternative explanations
In this section, we consider alternative explanations and potential confounding factors for our main ﬁndings.
4.3.1. Business cycle effects
Rational explanations for the relationship between stock returns and monetary policy put emphasis on the state of the
economy. Theoretical work and previous empirical evidence suggest that the impact of policy shifts on the stock market var-
ies over the business cycle, being stronger during recessions ( Perez-Quiros and Timmermann, 2000; Basistha and Kurov,
2008). Our results regarding the importance of sentiment-waning phases could then be explained by the effect of recessions,
as long as sentiment co-moves with the economy. The use of orthogonalized sentiment, however, safeguards against this
possibility by removing business cycle variation from the raw sentiment measures. As we have highlighted earlier, there
is no correlation between recessions and corrections in sentiment.
Nevertheless, to formally account for business cycle effects within our framework, we interact the sentiment-waning
phases with business cycle indicators. Essentially, we conduct a 4-way decomposition of the monetary policy impact by esti-
mating Eq. 5:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1ð1 /C0 SHD
t Þð1 /C0 Rect ÞDiu
t þ b2ð1 /C0 SHD
t ÞRect Diu
t
þb3SHD
t ð1 /C0 Rect ÞDiu
t þ b4SHD
t Rect Diu
t þ et
ð5Þ
where Rect is a variable that captures the state of the economy, which we measure by the NBER business cycle chronology

/C0 SHD
t ÞRect Diu
t
þb3SHD
t ð1 /C0 Rect ÞDiu
t þ b4SHD
t Rect Diu
t þ et
ð5Þ
where Rect is a variable that captures the state of the economy, which we measure by the NBER business cycle chronology
(NBERt ) and the real time probability of recession ( Recprobt ). NBERt is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meet-
ing occurred during a month that U.S. economy is in recession, as classiﬁed by the NBER business cycle dates. Recprobt is
equal to the real time recession probability provided by the FRED database for the month when the FOMC meeting takes
place, obtained from the dynamic-factor Markov-Switching model of Chauvet and Piger (2008) . The source for both proxies
of economic states is the FRED database. There is a close correspondence between the two business cycle indicators, with the
correlation coefﬁcient being equal to 0.9.
The estimation results in the left-hand of Table 6 are based on the NBER recession indicator. They reveal that during
sentiment-waning phases the stock market responds signiﬁcantly to FFR surprises only outside recessions, as captured by
b3. The corresponding effect during recessions, as captured by b4, is statistically insigniﬁcant. Similar insights are obtained
using the recession probability indicator (right-hand of Table 6 ). Hence, the main challenge for explanations based on bad
economic states is the disconnection between recessions and the stock market response to policy surprises, once the role

ght-hand of Table 6 ). Hence, the main challenge for explanations based on bad
economic states is the disconnection between recessions and the stock market response to policy surprises, once the role
of sentiment has been accounted for. Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of sentiment states, along with their distinct nat-
ure, that previous studies do not consider when analyzing the effect of monetary policy on the stock market over the busi-
ness cycle.
4.3.2. Bear market effects
Previous studies show that the effect of monetary policy shocks on the stock market is stronger during bear markets
(Chen, 2007; Jansen and Tsai, 2010; Kurov, 2010; Li, 2015 ). At the same time, it is well-established that sentiment is low
(high) during bear (bull) markets ( Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Mian and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012 ). A priori, it is unlikely that
a perfect association will arise between sentiment-waning phases (captured by SHD
t ) and bear market episodes. For instance,
sentiment can decline from a high level but not necessarily to the low point of a bear market. Nevertheless, sentiment-
Table 5
Response of variance risk premium changes to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment This table presents OLS estimates with
Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: DVRPt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiu
t +b2 SH
t Diu
t +et ,

table presents OLS estimates with
Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: DVRPt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiu
t +b2 SH
t Diu
t +et ,
where DVRPt denotes the daily change in the S&P 500 Variance Risk Premium (VRP). Diu
t denotes the unexpected FFR changes. SH
t is a dummy variable that is
equal to 1 (0) if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year that starts with high (low) sentiment level. A year is deﬁned as starting with high (low) sentime nt if
the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year is above (below) the full sample mean value. Panel B of this table replaces SH
t in the above
equation with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then declines, and 0
otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year exceed s the
full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consume r
Conﬁdence index. The sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17
September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance a t the 10%, 5%
and 1% level, respectively.

of the 17
September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance a t the 10%, 5%
and 1% level, respectively.
Obs b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2
Panel A: SH
t
172 /C0 0:12/C3/C3/C3 0.03 1 :04/C3/C3 0.01
(0.04) (0.43) (0.51)
Panel B: SHD
t
172 /C0 0:12/C3/C3/C3 /C0 0.07 1 :28/C3/C3 0.02
(0.04) (0.42) (0.54)
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
11

waning phases may encompass bear market episodes, prompting us to analyze the impact of the latter within our
framework.
While there is no commonly accepted deﬁnition for bear markets, we use two proxies that have been used in previous
studies and are consistent with the standard notion of signiﬁcant and sustained stock price declines. Bear2yt is a dummy
variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a month when the S&P 500 stock market index is lower than
its 2-year moving average, and 0 otherwise ( Kontonikas et al., 2013 ). Bearprobt is equal to the bear market probability for the
month when the FOMC meeting takes place, obtained from the Markov-Switching model of Chen (2007) .22 Fig. 3 plots the
changes-based sentiment states along with two alternative bear market indicators and shows that while some sentiment-
waning years overlap with bear markets episodes (e.g. 2001 and 2008), there are also instances of sentiment-waning outside
bear markets (e.g. 1995 and 2004–5). The correlation coefﬁcient between SHD
t and Beart is low, equal to 0.16 for the case of
Bear2yt and 0.20 for Bearprobt .23 Following the preliminary analysis, which suggests that our ﬁndings are not likely to be driven
by bear markets, we proceed to formally investigate their role by estimating Eq. 6:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1ð1 /C0 SHD
t Þð1 /C0 Beart ÞDiu
t þ b2ð1 /C0 SHD
t ÞBeart Diu
t
þb3SHD
t ð1 /C0 Beart ÞDiu
t þ b4SHD
t Beart Diu
t þ et
ð6Þ
where Beart is an indicator of bear markets.

estimating Eq. 6:
Rt ¼ b0 þ b1ð1 /C0 SHD
t Þð1 /C0 Beart ÞDiu
t þ b2ð1 /C0 SHD
t ÞBeart Diu
t
þb3SHD
t ð1 /C0 Beart ÞDiu
t þ b4SHD
t Beart Diu
t þ et
ð6Þ
where Beart is an indicator of bear markets.
The results in Panel A of Table 7 show that during sentiment-waning phases the stock market response to FFR surprises is
signiﬁcant during both bear markets, as captured by b4, and outside them, as captured by b3. Outside sentiment-waning peri-
ods, the impact of policy shocks is indistinguishable from zero, regardless of whether the market is in bear state. This evi-
dence is robust to the use of two proxies of bear markets. Since the null hypothesis b2 ¼ 0 cannot be rejected, our ﬁndings do
not support an alternative explanation that would require the state dependence to be solely function of bear markets.
In Panel B of Table 7 we conduct an additional analysis to account for the potential link between market states and
sentiment-waning phases. In particular, we start by orthogonalizing the raw sentiment index data using the bear market
indicator of Chen (2007) as an additional control in the set of macroeconomic variables that we used previously, as described
in Section 3.2. Having done do, we reconstruct the sentiment-waning phases dummy variable, based upon the newly orthog-
onalized sentiment index, We then re-estimate the baseline model using the new sentiment-waning dummy ( SHDB
t )u pt o
December 2007, to match the sample to the bear market measure endpoint.

y orthog-
onalized sentiment index, We then re-estimate the baseline model using the new sentiment-waning dummy ( SHDB
t )u pt o
December 2007, to match the sample to the bear market measure endpoint. The results show that accounting for the role
of bear markets, through the new orthogonalization scheme, does not affect our main conclusions. The estimates are very
close to those from the baseline analysis, and the relationship between stock market returns and FFR shocks is statistically
signiﬁcant only during sentiment-waning phases. Hence, overall, our ﬁndings point out the distinct and important role of
sentiment-waning phases, which is not subsumed by controlling for bear markets.
4.3.3. Pre-announcement effect, information leakage and the role of unscheduled meetings
Lucca and Moench (2015) document large average returns in the U.S. stock market in anticipation of monetary policy
decisions made at scheduled FOMC meetings. FOMC statements are typically scheduled to be released in the afternoon. Thus,
the daily returns on FOMC meeting days incorporate a pre-announcement window, implying that our results may be con-
founded by the pre-FOMC announcement drift. To rule out such effects, we turn to intraday data and calculate the stock mar-
ket return, proxied by the S&P500 index, over a short period surrounding the FOMC announcement. Speciﬁcally, we start by
considering a 30-min window, commencing 10 min before the FOMC announcement and ending 20 min after it: (-10, 20).

dex, over a short period surrounding the FOMC announcement. Speciﬁcally, we start by
considering a 30-min window, commencing 10 min before the FOMC announcement and ending 20 min after it: (-10, 20).
Table 6
Response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment - role of recessions This table presents OLS estimates
with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: Rt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SHD
t Þð1 /C0 Rect ÞDiu
t
+b2 ð1 /C0 SHD
t ÞRect Diu
t +b3 SHD
t ð1 /C0 Rect ÞDiu
t +b4 SHD
t Rect Diu
t +et , where Rt and Diu
t denote CRSP value-weighted market returns and unexpected FFR changes,
respectively. SHD
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then declines, and 0
otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year exceed s the
full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consume r
Conﬁdence index. Rect is a variable that captures the state of the economy, measured by the NBER business cycle chronology and the real time probability of
recession. Speciﬁcally, NBERt is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a U.S. recession as classiﬁed by NBER business cycle

ronology and the real time probability of
recession. Speciﬁcally, NBERt is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a U.S. recession as classiﬁed by NBER business cycle
dates and 0 otherwise. Recprobt is equal to the real time recession probability when the FOMC meeting takes place, obtained from the dynamic-factor Markov-
Switching model of Chauvet and Piger (2008) . The sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with
the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate stat istical
signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2 Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2
NBERt Recprobt
181 0 :23/C3/C3 /C0 0.62 0.62 /C0 10:38/C3/C3/C3 /C0 5.19 0.18 181 0 :23/C3/C3 /C0 0.63 1.51 /C0 10:22/C3/C3/C3 /C0 4.24 0.17
(0.09) (1.15) (1.17) (1.92) (4.37) (0.09) (1.17) (2.26) (2.84) (7.99)
22 We thank S. Chen for sharing with us the bear market probability data. The data is available up to December 2007.
23 The correlation coefﬁcient between the two bear market proxies is 0.7.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
12

Bernile et al. (2016) and Kurov et al. (2019) also focus on the pre-announcement effect and provide evidence consistent
with information leakage during the FOMC news embargo period. To ensure that our results are not driven by news leakage
during the embargo period, we further employ a tighter window, which commences 1 min before the announcement: (-1,
20). Likewise, FFR surprises are calculated using intraday data and the same windows with stock returns. This helps isolate
the impact of news about monetary policy more effectively and mitigate endogeneity concerns ( Gürkaynak et al., 2005;
Gertler and Karadi, 2015 ). The sources of intraday data are TickData and CME Group for the S&P500 index and FFR futures
prices, respectively. The latter is available only since January 1995, and hence our intraday estimations have a later start date
relative to the baseline daily analysis.
Panel A of Table 8 reports intraday estimates of Eq. 2.24 Starting with the wider window of (-10, 20), we ﬁnd that the effect
of sentiment on the transmission of FFR surprises to the stock market is robust to the use of intraday data for the identiﬁcation
of policy surprises and the stock market reaction. Policy shifts affect the stock market only following high sentiment periods, as
Fig. 3. Sentiment-waning phases and bear markets This ﬁgure plots the changes-based sentiment states (solid line), as captured by SHD
t , along with two

rket only following high sentiment periods, as
Fig. 3. Sentiment-waning phases and bear markets This ﬁgure plots the changes-based sentiment states (solid line), as captured by SHD
t , along with two
alternative bear market indicators (dotted line) on scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008 (left-hand panel) and Jun e
1989 - December 2007 (right-hand panel), with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. SHD
t is a dummy
variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is
deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previous year exceeds the full sample
mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consumer
Conﬁdence index. The bear market indicator in the left-hand panel (solid line) is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a
month when the S&P 500 stock market index is lower than its 2-year moving average, and 0 otherwise ( Kontonikas et al., 2013 ). The bear market indicator
in the right-hand panel (dotted line) is equal to the bear market probability for the month when the FOMC meeting takes place, obtained from the Markov-
Switching model of Chen (2007) .
Table 7

cator
in the right-hand panel (dotted line) is equal to the bear market probability for the month when the FOMC meeting takes place, obtained from the Markov-
Switching model of Chen (2007) .
Table 7
Response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment - role of bear markets Panel A of this table presents
OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the following model: Rt =b0
+b1 ð1 /C0 SHD
t Þð1 /C0 Beart ÞDi
u
t +b2 ð1 /C0 SHD
t ÞBeart Di
u
t +b3 SHD
t ð1 /C0 Beart ÞDi
u
t +b4 SHD
t Beart Di
u
t +et , where Rt and Di
u
t denote CRSP value-weighted market returns and
unexpected FFR changes, respectively. SHD
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level
but then declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of t he
previous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentimen t
proxy is the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index. Beart is an indicator of bear markets. Speciﬁcally, Bear2yt is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC
meeting occurred during a month when the S&P 500 stock market index is lower than its 2-year moving average, and 0 otherwise ( Kontonikas et al., 2013 ).

dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC
meeting occurred during a month when the S&P 500 stock market index is lower than its 2-year moving average, and 0 otherwise ( Kontonikas et al., 2013 ).
Bearprobt is equal to the bear market probability for the month when the FOMC meeting takes place, obtained from the Markov-Switching model of Chen
(2007). Panel B of this table presents OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the
following model: Rt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDi
u
t +b2 SH
t Di
u
t +et , In the right-hand of Panel B, SHD
t is replaced by SHDB
t , a dummy variable generated in the same way with SHD
t
but using a newly orthogonalized sentiment index that accounts for the role of bear markets. In Panel A, for Bear2yt the sample period includes scheduled and
unscheduled FOMC meetings over June 1989 - December 2008, with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. For
Bearprob
t , as well as for the Panel B estimations, the sample period ends in December 2007. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate
statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2 Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2
Panel A
Bear2yt Bearprobt
181 0 :23/C3/C3 /C0 0.45 0.6 /C0 8:73/C3/C3/C3 /C0 7:99/C3/C3 0.18 172 0 :17/C3/C3 /C0 0.78 0.81 /C0 6:15/C3/C3 /C0 13:20/C3/C3/C3 0.31

3 b4 Adj:R2 Obs b0 b1 b2 b3 b4 Adj:R2
Panel A
Bear2yt Bearprobt
181 0 :23/C3/C3 /C0 0.45 0.6 /C0 8:73/C3/C3/C3 /C0 7:99/C3/C3 0.18 172 0 :17/C3/C3 /C0 0.78 0.81 /C0 6:15/C3/C3 /C0 13:20/C3/C3/C3 0.31
(0.09) (0.09) (1.06) (1.57) (3.07) (0.08) (1.29) (2.19) (2.68) (1.89)
Panel B
SHD
t SHDB
t
172 0 :14/C3 /C0 0.47 /C0 10:33/C3/C3/C3 0:31 172 0 :15/C3 /C0 1.13 /C0 10:21/C3/C3/C3 0:27
(0.08) (0.93) (1.39) (0.08) (0.99) (1.45)
24 See Table A5 in the Online Appendix for information on the FOMC announcement time that we use in the intraday analysis.
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
13

Table 8
Intraday response of stock market returns to FFR surprises conditional upon the state of investor sentiment - role of pre-announcement effect, infor mation leakage, unscheduled meetings and Fed
information. Panel A of this table presents OLS estimates with Huber–White heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors, over FOMC announcement days, of the f ollowing model: Rt =b0 +b1 ð1 /C0 SH
t ÞDiu
t +b2 SH
t Diu
t +et ,
where Rt and Diu
t denote log returns on the S&P500 index and unexpected FFR changes, respectively. Both aforementioned variables are measured using intraday data and windows surrounding FOMC announcements.
When the embargo period is included, the relevant windows is: 30-min (-10,20). When the embargo period is excluded, the relevant windows is 21-min (-1 ,20). SH
t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 (0) if the FOMC
meeting occurred during a year that starts with high (low) sentiment level. A year is deﬁned as starting with high (low) sentiment if the sentiment prox y at the end (December) of the previous year is above (below) the
full sample mean value. Panel B of this table replaces SH
t in the above equation with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then
declines, and 0 otherwise.

replaces SH
t in the above equation with SHD
t , a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the FOMC meeting occurred during a year when sentiment starts at high level but then
declines, and 0 otherwise. A year is deﬁned as of high at the start but then decreasing sentiment if the sentiment proxy at the end (December) of the previ ous year exceeds the full sample mean value and the sentiment
proxy at the end of that year is lower than at the end of the previous year. The sentiment proxy is the U.S. Consumer Conﬁdence index. Panels C and D of this t able repeat the analysis of Panels A and B, respectively, but
exclude meetings associated with Fed information effects, as documented by Bauer and Swanson (2021) . The sample period includes scheduled and unscheduled FOMC meetings over February 1995 - December 2008,
with the exception of the 17 September 2001 and 22 January 2008 unscheduled meetings. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
All meetings Scheduled meetings only
(-10, 20) (-1, 20) (-10, 20) (-1, 20)
Obs b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2 b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2 Obs b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2 b0 b1 b2 Adj:R2
Panel A: SH
t
117 /C0 0:16/C3/C3/C3 /C0 0.01 /C0 7:06/C3/C3/C3 0.51 /C0 0:14/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.38 /C0 7:14/C3/C3/C3 0.44 112 /C0 0:16/C3/C3/C3 /C0 0.01 /C0 4:46/C3/C3/C3 0.20 /C0 0:16/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.26 /C0 4:83/C3/C3/C3 0.19
(0.04) (0.88) (1.26) (0.05) (1.12) (1.45) (0.04) (0.87) (1.33) (0.04) (1.10) (1.47)

/C3/C3 0.44 112 /C0 0:16/C3/C3/C3 /C0 0.01 /C0 4:46/C3/C3/C3 0.20 /C0 0:16/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.26 /C0 4:83/C3/C3/C3 0.19
(0.04) (0.88) (1.26) (0.05) (1.12) (1.45) (0.04) (0.87) (1.33) (0.04) (1.10) (1.47)
Panel B: SHD
t
117 /C0 0:14/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.64 /C0 7:34/C3/C3/C3 0.52 /C0 0:13/C3/C3/C3 /C0 2:93/C3 /C0 7:21/C3/C3/C3 0.44 112 /C0 0:15/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.65 /C0 4:80/C3/C3/C3 0.20 /C0 0:15/C3/C3/C3 /C0 2:97/C3 /C0 4:80/C3/C3/C3 0.19
(0.04) (1.29) (1.28) (0.05) (1.70) (1.50) (0.04) (1.30) (1.55) (0.04) (1.73) (1.61)
Panel C: SH
t excluding Fed information effects
108 /C0 0:14/C3/C3/C3 1.32 /C0 7:06/C3/C3/C3 0.50 /C0 0:13/C3/C3 0.06 /C0 7:27/C3/C3/C3 0.44 103 /C0 0:13/C3/C3/C3 1.32 /C0 3:85/C3/C3 0.14 /C0 0:15/C3/C3/C3 0.16 /C0 4:47/C3/C3 0.15
(0.05) (3.13) (1.34) (0.05) (4.08) (1.61) (0.04) (3.14) (1.59) (0.04) (4.04) (1.88)
Panel D: SHD
t excluding Fed information effects
108 /C0 0:12/C3/C3 /C0 1.66 /C0 7:32/C3/C3/C3 0.52 /C0 0:11/C3/C3 /C0 3.66 /C0 7:31/C3/C3/C3 0.44 103 /C0 0:13/C3/C3/C3 /C0 1.75 /C0 4:15/C3/C3 0.14 /C0 0:14/C3/C3/C3 /C0 4.02 /C0 4:33/C3/C3 0.14
(0.05) (-1.95) (1.39) (0.05) (3.15) (1.65) (0.04) (1.95) (1.89) (0.04) (3.13) (2.04)
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
14

indicated by the highly signiﬁcant estimates of b2. Using all FOMC meetings (scheduled and unscheduled), intraday estimates
are slightly smaller in terms of magnitude but still remarkably close to the daily estimates in Panel A of Table 2 ; for example,
note the b2 estimates of /C0 7.14 (intraday) and /C0 7.38 (daily). Replacing SH
t with SHD
t in Panel B, we obtain similar insights to those
from the daily estimates, since the effect of policy surprises concentrates on years when sentiment starts at high level and sub-
sequently declines. Outside of sentiment-waning phases, the effect of policy shocks, as captured by b1, is statistically insignif-
icant at the 5% level. The ﬁndings from using the 30-min window implies that new information is quickly impounded in asset
prices. Using a tighter window (-1, 20) for the intraday analysis yields similar ﬁndings.
Table 8 also reports results from only using scheduled FOMC meetings. The approach of removing unscheduled meetings
is consistent with Lucca and Moench (2015) and other related studies. Unscheduled meetings are interesting since they may
be linked with the Fed put story, in which, monetary policy is eased in times of ﬁnancial turmoil, but not tightened accord-
ingly when ﬁnancial conditions are good ( Ozdagli, 2017; Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2017 ). Bernanke (2015) highlights
that a rate move outside regularly scheduled FOMC meetings is usually taken in responding to emergencies. These interven-

agli, 2017; Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2017 ). Bernanke (2015) highlights
that a rate move outside regularly scheduled FOMC meetings is usually taken in responding to emergencies. These interven-
tions aim to restore conﬁdence by positively surprising investors. It is likely that the urgency nature conveyed by the FOMC
will increase the magnitude of the stock market response ( Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005 ).
Indeed, unscheduled meetings are typically associated with fairly large expansionary policy surprises and on several
occasions, though not always, the stock market reacted euphorically to the news. For example, there was a strong positive
response to the intermeeting rate cut on 15 October 1998, which occurred during a period of market turmoil associated with
the Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) crisis. When unscheduled meetings are removed, the magnitude of the impact of
FFR surprises during sentiment-waning phases declines somewhat. For instance, with the wider window, removing unsched-
uled meetings reduces the magnitude of b2 from /C0 7.34 to /C0 4.80 in Panel B. Nevertheless, the effect remains highly
signiﬁcant.
Overall, intraday evidence suggests that our results are not driven by the pre-announcement effect or information leakage
during the FOMC news embargo period. Moreover, our conclusions concerning the importance of sentiment states are robust
to the incorporation (removal) of unscheduled FOMC meetings to (from) the sample.
4.3.4. Fed information effect

iod. Moreover, our conclusions concerning the importance of sentiment states are robust
to the incorporation (removal) of unscheduled FOMC meetings to (from) the sample.
4.3.4. Fed information effect
According to the Fed information effect, FOMC announcements simultaneously reveal information about monetary policy
and the Fed’s assessment of the economic outlook. This literature extends back to the work of Romer and Romer (2000) ,
which demonstrates that the Fed has considerable information about future inﬂation beyond what is known to private sector
forecasters. More recent contributions include, among others, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018),Lunsford (2020) , Jarocin´ ski
and Karadi (2020),Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2021) , and Bauer and Swanson (2021) . The evidence concerning the impor-
tance of the information effect is rather mixed. For example, Bauer and Swanson (2021) ﬁnd that there is little if any role for
the Fed information effect, while Lunsford (2020) shows that the Fed information effect is present in the period from Febru-
ary 2000 to August 2003, but not afterwards. At the same time, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) conclude that the Fed infor-
mation effect exists, since monetary policy tightenings are associated with a signiﬁcant upward revision in Blue Chip GDP
forecasts.
To account for the Fed information effect, we follow Bauer and Swanson (2021) and analyse intraday data, removing from

ngs are associated with a signiﬁcant upward revision in Blue Chip GDP
forecasts.
To account for the Fed information effect, we follow Bauer and Swanson (2021) and analyse intraday data, removing from
the sample of FOMC meetings a number of observations for which the information effect is strongest. The latter are identiﬁed
using the approach of Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) .25 The intraday results from estimating Eq. 2 using the level and
changes-based sentiment states are reported, respectively, in Panels C and D of Table 8 . In line with Bauer and Swanson
(2021), we show that removing the FOMC meetings with the strongest information effect, our main conclusions remain
unchanged. The impact of monetary policy shocks on stock returns depends on the state of investor sentiment, manifesting
itself only during sentiment-waning phases. Comparing the magnitude of the relevant coefﬁcient, b2, in Panel B, where the
meetings with the strongest information effect are included, with Panel D, where they are excluded, we note that it is remark-
ably similar. Therefore, our evidence on the important role of investor sentiment is not affected by the Fed information effect.
5. Robustness checks
We conduct a host of robustness checks and our ﬁndings remain unchanged. The results are presented and discussed in
the Online Appendix. The ﬁrst check involves using alternative measures of investor sentiment, in particular the BWI and the
CSI (Table A6).

emain unchanged. The results are presented and discussed in
the Online Appendix. The ﬁrst check involves using alternative measures of investor sentiment, in particular the BWI and the
CSI (Table A6). In the second check, we estimate the impact of FFR surprises having removed the FOMC meetings that coin-
cide with employment data releases (Table A7). In the third check, we consider an estimation method that is robust to the
presence of outliers (Table A8). The fourth check examines whether the impact of monetary policy shocks persists over the
days that follow the FOMC meeting (Table A9). We are mindful of the possibility of endogeneity due to the simultaneous
reaction of stocks and the market-based measure of monetary policy to new information. To mitigate this concern, in the
ﬁfth check we employ the approach proposed by Thornton (2014) to address the joint-response bias (Table A10).
25 These are the most inﬂuential observations for regression model (3) in Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) . That is, they provide the strongest evidence of an
information effect for GDP. For a list, see Table 6 in Bauer and Swanson (2021) .
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
15

6. Conclusions
This study brings together two broad streams of the existing literature by seeking to incorporate insights from beha-
vioural ﬁnance to research about the impact of monetary policy on ﬁnancial markets. We use an event study framework
and show that the state of investor sentiment affects the transmission of monetary policy news to the stock market. We con-
struct sentiment states using two alternative approaches based on the level of sentiment at the start of the year, and changes
in sentiment over the year. Our approach is motivated by the (slowly) mean-reverting nature of sentiment, whereby epi-
sodes of exuberance tend to be followed by a correction phase. Our evidence reveals that the impact of monetary policy
news, proxied by unexpected changes in the FFR, is mostly potent during the sentiment-waning phases that follow overval-
uation. In particular, when sentiment is high at the start of the year but then declines, as e.g. in 2001, following the culmi-
nation of the ”dot-com” boom. Importantly, we show that only expansionary news matter, leading to a positive stock market
reaction.
We propose an explanation that is related to the alleviation of investors’ fear. During sentiment-waning phases, overpric-
ing tends to be corrected, which generates investment losses and uncertainty about exposure to future losses, hence making
investors anxious and fearful. Easing surprises during such periods should boost the stock market by alleviating investors’
fear.

t losses and uncertainty about exposure to future losses, hence making
investors anxious and fearful. Easing surprises during such periods should boost the stock market by alleviating investors’
fear. Empirical analysis, using the variance risk premium component of the VIX, which to a large extent reﬂects ‘‘crash-o-
phobia”, supports this idea. Overall, the capacity of sentiment to determine the state dependence that we observe in the link
between stock returns and monetary policy news, make rational pricing hard to reconcile with our evidence.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
References
Acharya, V., Naqvi, H., 2019. On reaching for yield and the coexistence of bubbles and negative bubbles. J. Finan. Intermed. 38, 1–10 .
Adrian, T., Shin, H.S., 2010. Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics. In: Friedman, B.M., Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Econo mics,
Volume 3, Chapter 12. Elsevier, pp. 601–650 .
Antoniou, C., Doukas, J.A., Subrahmanyam, A., 2013. Cognitive dissonance, sentiment, and momentum. J. Finan. Quant. Anal. 48 (01), 245–275 .
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2006. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. J. Finance 61 (4), 1645–1680 .
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2007. Investor sentiment in the stock market. J. Econ. Perspect. 21 (2), 129–152 .

6. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. J. Finance 61 (4), 1645–1680 .
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2007. Investor sentiment in the stock market. J. Econ. Perspect. 21 (2), 129–152 .
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., Yuan, Y., 2012. Global, local, and contagious investor sentiment. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (2), 272–287 .
Balvers, R.J., Huang, D., 2009. Money and the C-CAPM. J. Finan. Quant. Anal. 44 (02), 337–368 .
Basistha, A., Kurov, A., 2008. Macroeconomic cycles and the stock market’s reaction to monetary policy. J. Bank. Finance 32 (12), 2606–2616 .
Bauer, M.D., Swanson, E.T., 2021. An alternative explanation for the fed information effect. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisc o.
Bekaert, G., Hoerova, M., 2014. The vix, the variance premium and stock market volatility. J. Econ. 183 (2), 181–192 .
Bekaert, G., Hoerova, M., Duca, M.L., 2013. Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy. J. Monet. Econ. 60 (7), 771–788 .
Bernanke, B.S., 2015. The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and its Aftermath. W.W. Norton & Company .
Bernanke, B.S., Kuttner, K.N., 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction to Federal Reserve policy? J. Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257 .
Bernanke, B.S., Mihov, I., 1998. Measuring monetary policy. Quart. J. Econ. 113 (3), 869–902 .
Bernile, G., Hu, J., Tang, Y., 2016. Can information be locked up? Informed trading ahead of macro-news announcements. J. Financ. Econ. 121 (3), 496–5 20.
Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., Zhou, H., 2009.

Bernile, G., Hu, J., Tang, Y., 2016. Can information be locked up? Informed trading ahead of macro-news announcements. J. Financ. Econ. 121 (3), 496–5 20.
Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., Zhou, H., 2009. Expected stock returns and variance risk premia. Rev. Finan. Stud. 22 (11), 4463–4492 .
Bollerslev, T., Todorov, V., 2011. Tails, fears, and risk premia. J. Finance 66 (6), 2165–2211 .
Brunnermeier, M., Nagel, S., 2004. Hedge funds and the technology bubble. J. Finance 59 (5), 2013–2040 .
Campbell, J.Y., Cochrane, J.H., 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107 (2) , 205–251.
Cenesizoglu, T., 2014. The reaction of stock returns to news about fundamentals. Manage. Sci. 61 (5), 1072–1093 .
Chauvet, M., Piger, J., 2008. A comparison of the real-time performance of business cycle dating methods. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 26 (1), 42–49 .
Chen, S.-S., 2007. Does monetary policy have asymmetric effects on stock returns? J. Money, Credit Bank. 39 (2–3), 667–688 .
Chung, S.-L., Hung, C.-H., Yeh, C.-Y., 2012. When does investor sentiment predict stock returns? J. Empirical Finance 19 (2), 217–240 .
Cieslak, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2017. The economics of the Fed put. Unpublished paper.
De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (4), 703–738 .
Dell’Ariccia, G., Laeven, L., Suarez, G.A., 2017.

shed paper.
De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (4), 703–738 .
Dell’Ariccia, G., Laeven, L., Suarez, G.A., 2017. Bank leverage and monetary policy’s risk-taking channel: Evidence from the united states. J. Fina nce 72 (2),
613–654.
Di Maggio, M., Kacperczyk, M., 2017. The unintended consequences of the zero lower bound policy. J. Financ. Econ. 123 (1), 59–80 .
Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2018. A model of monetary policy and risk premia. J. Finance 73 (1), 317–373 .
Evans, C.L., 1998. Real-time taylor rules and the federal funds futures market. Econ. Perspect. 22 (3), 44–56 .
Fisher, K.L., Statman, M., 2003. Consumer conﬁdence and stock returns. J. Portfolio Manage. 30 (1), 115–127 .
Garcia, D., 2013. Sentiment during recessions. J. Finance 68 (3), 1267–1300 .
Gertler, M., Karadi, P., 2015. Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic activity. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 7 (1), 44–76 .
Gervais, S., Odean, T., 2001. Learning to be overconﬁdent. Rev. Finan. Stud. 14 (1), 1–27 .
Gino, F., Brooks, A.W., Schweitzer, M.E., 2012. Anxiety, advice, and the ability to discern: Feeling anxious motivates individuals to seek and use ad vice. J.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. 102 (3), 497 .
Greenspan, A., 2008. The age of turbulence: Adventures in a new world. Penguin .
Greenspan, A., 2009. We need a better cushion against risk. Financial. Times 26. March 2009 .

Psychol. 102 (3), 497 .
Greenspan, A., 2008. The age of turbulence: Adventures in a new world. Penguin .
Greenspan, A., 2009. We need a better cushion against risk. Financial. Times 26. March 2009 .
Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B., Swanson, E.T., 2005. Do actions speak louder than words? The response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statem ents.
Int. J. Central Bank. 1 (1), 55–93 .
Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B.P., Swanson, E.T., 2007. Market-based measures of monetary policy expectations. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 25 (2), 201–212 .
Ho, C., Hung, C.-H., 2009. Investor sentiment as conditioning information in asset pricing. J. Bank. Finance 33 (5), 892–903 .
Huang, D., Jiang, F., Tu, J., Zhou, G., 2015. Investor sentiment aligned: A powerful predictor of stock returns. Rev. Finan. Stud. 28 (3), 791–837 .
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
16

Jansen, D.W., Tsai, C.-L., 2010. Monetary policy and stock returns: Financing constraints and asymmetries in bull and bear markets. J. Empir. Financ e 17 (5),
981–990.
Jarocin´ ski, M., Karadi, P., 2020. Deconstructing monetary policy surprises–the role of information shocks. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 12 (2), 1–43 .
Kontonikas, A., MacDonald, R., Saggu, A., 2013. Stock market reaction to fed funds rate surprises: State dependence and the ﬁnancial crisis. J. Bank. Finance
37 (11), 4025–4037 .
Kumar, A., Lee, C., 2006. Retail investor sentiment and return comovements. J. Finance 61 (5), 2451–2486 .
Kurov, A., 2010. Investor sentiment and the stock market’s reaction to monetary policy. J. Bank. Finance 34 (1), 139–149 .
Kurov, A., Sancetta, A., Strasser, G., Wolfe, M.H., 2019. Price drift before us macroeconomic news: Private information about public announcements ? J. Finan.
Quant. Anal. 54 (1), 449–479 .
Kuttner, K.N., 2001. Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed funds futures market. J. Monet. Econ. 47 (3), 523–544 .
Kuttner, K.N., 2003. Dating changes in the federal funds rate. Working paper, Oberlin College.
Lemmon, M., Portniaguina, E., 2006. Consumer conﬁdence and asset prices: Some empirical evidence. Rev. Finan. Stud. 19 (4), 1499–1529 .
Li, J., 2015. The asymmetric effects of investor sentiment and monetary policy on stock prices. Appl. Econ. 47 (24), 2514–2522 .
Lioui, A., Maio, P., 2014.

dence. Rev. Finan. Stud. 19 (4), 1499–1529 .
Li, J., 2015. The asymmetric effects of investor sentiment and monetary policy on stock prices. Appl. Econ. 47 (24), 2514–2522 .
Lioui, A., Maio, P., 2014. Interest rate risk and the cross section of stock returns. J. Finan. Quant. Anal. 49 (2), 483–511 .
Lucca, D.O., Moench, E., 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement drift. J. Finance 70 (1), 329–371 .
Lunsford, K.G., 2020. Policy language and information effects in the early days of federal reserve forward guidance. Am. Econ. Rev. 110 (9), 2899–293 4.
Lutz, C., 2015. The impact of conventional and unconventional monetary policy on investor sentiment. J. Bank. Finance 61, 89–105 .
Maio, P.F., 2014. Another look at the stock return response to monetary policy actions. Review of Finance 18 (1), 321–371 .
McLean, R.D., Zhao, M., 2014. The business cycle, investor sentiment, and costly external ﬁnance. J. Finance 69 (3), 1377–1409 .
Mian, G.M., Sankaraguruswamy, S., 2012. Investor sentiment and stock market response to earnings news. Account. Rev. 87 (4), 1357–1384 .
Miranda-Agrippino, S., Ricco, G., 2021. The transmission of monetary policy shocks. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 13 (3), 74–107 .
Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. High-frequency identiﬁcation of monetary non-neutrality: the information effect. Quart. J. Econ. 133 (3), 1283 –1330.
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L., Collins, A., 1990. The cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge University Press .
Ozdagli, A., Weber, M., 2017.

the information effect. Quart. J. Econ. 133 (3), 1283 –1330.
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L., Collins, A., 1990. The cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge University Press .
Ozdagli, A., Weber, M., 2017. Monetary policy through production networks: Evidence from the stock market. Working paper. National Bureau of Econom ic
Research.
Ozdagli, A.K., 2017. Financial frictions and the stock price reaction to monetary policy. Rev. Finan. Stud. 31 (10), 3895–3936 .
Perez-Quiros, G., Timmermann, A., 2000. Firm size and cyclical variations in stock returns. J. Finance 55 (3), 1229–1262 .
Piazzesi, M., Swanson, E.T., 2008. Futures prices as risk-adjusted forecasts of monetary policy. J. Monet. Econ. 55 (4), 677–691 .
Romer, C.D., Romer, D.H., 2000. Federal reserve information and the behavior of interest rates. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (3), 429–457 .
Shiller, R.J., 2016. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press .
Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., 1990. The noise trader approach to ﬁnance. J. Econ. Perspect. 4 (2), 19–33 .
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. The limits of arbitrage. J. Finance 52 (1), 35–55 .
Stambaugh, R.F., Yu, J., Yuan, Y., 2012. The short of it: Investor sentiment and anomalies. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (2), 288–302 .
Thornton, D.L., 2014. The identiﬁcation of the response of interest rates to monetary policy actions using market-based measures of monetary policy shocks.
Oxford Econ. Papers 66 (1), 67–87 .
Welsch, R.E., Kuh, E., 1977. Linear regression diagnostics.

onse of interest rates to monetary policy actions using market-based measures of monetary policy shocks.
Oxford Econ. Papers 66 (1), 67–87 .
Welsch, R.E., Kuh, E., 1977. Linear regression diagnostics. Discussion paper.
Yu, J., Yuan, Y., 2011. Investor sentiment and the mean–variance relation. J. Financ. Econ. 100 (2), 367–381 .
H. Guo, Chi-Hsiou D. Hung and A. Kontonikas Journal of International Money and Finance 128 (2022) 102707
17
