Predicting the equity market with option-
implied variables 
Article 
Accepted Version 
Hollstein, F., Prokopczuk, M., Tharann, B. and Wese Simen, C.
(2019) Predicting the equity market with option-implied 
variables. European Journal of Finance, 25 (10). pp. 937-965. 
ISSN 1466-4364 doi: 10.1080/1351847X.2018.1556176 
Available at https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/81483/ 
It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the 
work. See Guidance on citing .
To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1351847X.2018.1556176 
Publisher: Taylor and Francis 
All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, 
including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other 
copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in 
the End User Agreement . 
www.reading.ac.uk/centaur 
CentAUR 
Central Archive at the University of Reading

Predicting the Equity Market with Option-Implied
Variables∗
Fabian Hollstein†, Marcel Prokopczuk †,‡, Bj¨ orn Tharann,†
and Chardin Wese Simen ‡
Abstract
We comprehensively analyze the predictive power of several option-implied variables
for monthly S&P 500 excess returns and realized variance. The correlation risk
premium (CRP ) and the variance risk premium ( VRP ) emerge as strong predictors
of both excess returns and realized variance. This is true both in- and out-of-sample.
Our results also reveal that statistical evidence of predictability does not necessarily
lead to economic gains. However, a timing strategy based on the CRP leads to utility
gains of more than 5.03 % per annum. Forecast combinations provide stable forecasts
for both excess returns and realized variance, and add economic value.
JEL classiﬁcation: G10, G11, G17
Keywords: Equity Premium, Option-Implied Information, Portfolio Choice,
aaaaaaaaaiaaaPredictability, Timing Strategies
∗We are grateful to Chris Adcock (the editor), an anonymous associate editor, two anonymous
referees, Duygu Zirek (discussant), Steven Clark, and other seminar participants at the Financial
Management Association Annual Meeting 2017 for valuable comments. We thank Fabian B¨ atje, and
Maik Dierkes for helpful comments and suggestions. Contact: hollstein@fmt.uni-hannover.de (F.
Hollstein), prokopczuk@fmt.uni-hannover.de (M. Prokopczuk), tharann@fmt.uni-hannover.de (B. Tharann),
and c.wese-simen@icmacentre.ac.uk (C. Wese Simen).

ns. Contact: hollstein@fmt.uni-hannover.de (F.
Hollstein), prokopczuk@fmt.uni-hannover.de (M. Prokopczuk), tharann@fmt.uni-hannover.de (B. Tharann),
and c.wese-simen@icmacentre.ac.uk (C. Wese Simen).
†Leibniz University Hannover, Koenigsworther Platz 1, D-30167 Hannover, Germany.
‡ICMA Centre, Henley Business School, University of Reading, Reading, RG6 6BA, U.K.

I. Introduction
A growing literature, e.g. Jiang & Tian (2005), Bollerslev et al. (2009), and Driessen
et al. (2013), documents the predictive power of option-implied variables for equity excess
returns and realized variance. The growing number of option-implied predictors raises several
questions: Which variables really forecast market excess returns? Do the variables that
predict market excess returns also forecast realized variance? Does predictability lead to
economic gains? These are some of the questions we want to study.
The main contribution of this paper is to provide a comprehensive analysis of the
forecasting ability of variables separately proposed in the recent literature on option-implied
predictors. We perform our analysis following the methodological background of Goyal
& Welch (2008). Importantly, we do not only analyze return predictability, but consider
the predictability of variance at the same time. This is important from a portfolio choice
perspective, since both quantities are needed for a portfolio decision. As such, we do not
only consider statistical predictability, but also analyze the economic signiﬁcance of return
and variance predictability. We ﬁnd that several variables, including the correlation risk
premium (CRP ) and the variance risk premium (VRP ), predict the monthly excess return
of the S&P 500. This is the case both in- and out-of-sample. We also show that both the

ing the correlation risk
premium (CRP ) and the variance risk premium (VRP ), predict the monthly excess return
of the S&P 500. This is the case both in- and out-of-sample. We also show that both the
CRP and the VRP predict not only the market excess return but also its realized variance.
On the other hand, while most predictors are based on the option-implied moments of Bakshi
et al. (2003), we note that the risk-neutral moments themselves have strong predictive power
only for realized variance but not for the market excess return.
When studying the economic eﬀects of the documented predictability in the context of
portfolio choice, we ﬁnd that relative to the agent who assumes that the mean and variance of
the market return are unpredictable, a mean–variance agent with a risk-aversion coeﬃcient
of 3 who uses the information content of the CRP would realize utility gains of 5.03 % per
1

annum (p.a.). Relatedly, we ﬁnd that a return timing strategy based on the VRP leads to
lower utility gains than those aﬀorded by the strategy based on the recursive mean. This
indicates that the statistical evidence of predictability of excess returns and realized variance,
respectively, by theVRP does not always translate into economic gains. We conjecture that
this result is due to the fact that individual variables lead to a large dispersion in the forecast
estimation. Forecast combinations instead appear to generate stable forecasts for both excess
returns and realized variance, and add economic value. Further, we link this result also to
the sign-switching behavior of the VRP around economically important periods.
A variable is considered to have predictive power if it passes two tests. First, it has to
generate statistically signiﬁcant forecasts. In this case the variable contains key information
about the variation in the market risk premium and the realized variance, respectively.
Bollerslev et al. (2009) and Drechsler & Yaron (2011) argue that time-varying economic
uncertainty is captured by the variance risk premium and, thus, aﬀects the variation in the
market risk premium. Driessen et al. (2009, 2013) state that the time-varying correlation
risk is linked to economic uncertainty and, thus, also relates to the market price of return
risk. Second, the variable needs to add economic value. Since the predictability, measured

ing correlation
risk is linked to economic uncertainty and, thus, also relates to the market price of return
risk. Second, the variable needs to add economic value. Since the predictability, measured
by the R2 is, in general, small in magnitude, the question arises whether it is economically
meaningful. Does an investor obtain an increase in utility by taking the variable into account?
This aspect is often ignored in the existing literature. Our results show that theCRP emerges
as the only predictor that passes both tests.
For robustness, we analyze the predictability of diﬀerent speciﬁcations of the VRP . We
follow Andersen & Bondarenko (2010), Andersen et al. (2015), and Feunou et al. (2015) and
decompose the total variance risk premium into the downside and upside components. The
results show that the upside and downside variance risk premia signiﬁcantly predict excess
returns and realized variance in-sample and add economic value based on a timing strategy.
Our work relates to the literature on the predictability of the market excess return
2

and/or its associated realized variance using option-implied quantities. Bollerslev et al.
(2009) document the predictive power of the variance risk premium for S&P 500 excess
returns, and Bollerslev et al. (2014) document similar results for a broad range of
international equity indices. Pyun (2016) provides evidence of a weak out-of-sample
performance of the variance risk premium for S&P 500 excess returns. Driessen et al.
(2009, 2013) show that the correlation risk premium predicts S&P 500 excess returns,
whereas Cosemans (2011) points out that the correlation risk premium and the systematic
part of individual variance risk premia drive the predictive power of the variance risk
premium for market excess returns. Zhou (2013) documents the predictive power of the
S&P 500 implied correlation index for S&P 500 index returns. Xing et al. (2010) ﬁnd that
the option-implied smirk contains information about the cross-section of equity returns.
Cremers & Weinbaum (2010) document that deviations from the put–call parity, measured
as the diﬀerence in implied volatility between pairs of call and put options of U.S. stocks,
contain information about the cross-section of stock returns and have predictive power for
these. Rehman & Vilkov (2012) and Stilger et al. (2016) show that implied skewness of
individual U.S. stocks has predictive power for future returns. Bali et al. (2011) introduce
an option-implied generalized measure of riskiness and provide evidence for its predictive

ied skewness of
individual U.S. stocks has predictive power for future returns. Bali et al. (2011) introduce
an option-implied generalized measure of riskiness and provide evidence for its predictive
power for the cross-section of individual stock returns. Bali et al. (2012) and Bali et al.
(2015) extend the analysis and document the predictive power of the generalized measure
for economic downturns and future market excess returns. Leiss et al. (2015) and Leiss & Nax
(2018) examine non-parametric risk-neutral densities from S&P 500 index options. Leiss &
Nax (2018) provide evidence for the predictive power of an option-implied riskiness measure
based on Foster & Hart (2009) for future downturns. Bali et al. (2017) document a relation
between the risk-neutral moments of Bakshi et al. (2003) and expected stock returns.
Jiang & Tian (2005) and Kourtis et al. (2016) establish the forecasting power of the
S&P 500 option-implied variance for realized variance. The above mentioned studies use
3

diﬀerent sample periods and statistical techniques to document their results, thus making
the interpretation and comparison of the ﬁndings somewhat diﬃcult. We use a common
sample period and recent developments in the literature on predictability to thoroughly
analyze all these variables.
Our study also relates to the literature on the economic value of predictability. Typically,
the literature analyzes the implications of return predictability for a return timing strategy
(e.g., Campbell & Thompson, 2008; C ¸ akmaklı & van Dijk, 2016). Similarly, studies on
realized variance predictability only explore the implications for a volatility/variance timing
strategy (Fleming et al., 2001). Unlike these studies, we jointly study the impact of return
and variance timing. This is important because in a mean–variance framework, the optimal
portfolio weight invested in the risky asset depends on both the expected return and the
expected realized variance. If a forecasting variable predicts both the market excess return
and the realized variance, it might be potentially important to account for these two eﬀects
when computing the optimal weight.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II. introduces the data and
explains the construction of the main variables. Section III. presents the main empirical
results. Section IV. discusses some further results. Section V. provides additional results.
Finally, Section VI. concludes.
II. Data and Methodology
II.A Data

ection III. presents the main empirical
results. Section IV. discusses some further results. Section V. provides additional results.
Finally, Section VI. concludes.
II. Data and Methodology
II.A Data
We obtain our data from three distinct sources. First, we retrieve the monthly time
series of the S&P 500 total return index as well as the corresponding dividend payments
from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database. Second, we obtain S&P
4

500 index option data from OptionMetrics. The OptionMetrics dataset contains information
about option contracts available in the market as well as standardized options, both of which
are useful for our analysis (see Section II.B). Third, we use intraday data on the S&P 500
index sampled at the 5-minute frequency from Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH). In
sampling the intraday data, we focus on the normal trading hours, i.e. from 09:30 AM to
04:00 PM Eastern Daylight Time (EDT). Our sample period extends from January 1996
to December 2014. It is worth pointing out that although the CRSP database covers a
period starting before 1996, this is not the case for the OptionMetrics and TRTH. Starting
our sample in January 1996 allows us to guarantee the availability of data from all three
databases.
II.B Variables
Armed with the dataset introduced above, we are now able to construct our main
variables.
Market Excess Return We compute the excess return on the S&P 500 index by
subtracting the riskless rate for the corresponding period from the total return on the equity
index:
ERt+1 = 12× log
(Pt+1
Pt
)
−rft, (1)
where ERt+1 is the (annualized) monthly excess return on the S&P 500 index at the end of
montht + 1. Pt+1 andPt denote the total return price index at the end of months t + 1 and
t, respectively. rft refers to the (annualized) riskless rate observed at the end of month t.1
Following Goyal & Welch (2008), we use the 1-month T-bill rate to proxy for the riskless
rate.

t + 1 and
t, respectively. rft refers to the (annualized) riskless rate observed at the end of month t.1
Following Goyal & Welch (2008), we use the 1-month T-bill rate to proxy for the riskless
rate.
1Throughout this paper, we use the convention that the riskless rate is given the subscript for the time
when it is observed. Thus, the riskless rate is observed at time t even though it is realized at time t + 1.
5

Realized Variance In order to estimate the realized variance of the stock market, we
exploit developments in the literature on high-frequency ﬁnancial econometrics. Andersen
et al. (2003) show that by sampling data at the intraday level, one can improve the accurate
measurement of realized variance. Building on this insight, we use intraday prices sampled
at the 5-minute frequency to compute the realized variance of the asset:
RVt+1 = 360
N ×


N∑
i=1


m−1∑
j=1
log
(St+ i
N,j+1
St+ i
N,j
)2
 + log
( St+ i
N,1
St+i−1
N ,m
)2
, (2)
where RVt+1 is the realized variance at the end of month t + 1. The ﬁrst term to the
right of the equality sign simply annualizes the variance estimate, where N is the number of
days between the end of month t and that of month t + 1. Each day contains m intraday
observations. St+ i
N,j+1 and St+ i
N,j are the spot prices observed on day t + i
N at times j + 1
and j, respectively. The last term to the right of the equality sign simply reﬂects the eﬀect
of overnight returns. In particular, it captures the impact of the return from the end of the
previous day to the opening of the following day.
Option-Implied Moments Recent studies document the information content of option-
implied moments, e.g. Jiang & Tian (2005), Prokopczuk & Wese Simen (2014), and Kourtis
et al. (2016), for realized variance. We exploit the theoretical results of Bakshi et al. (2003)

tent of option-
implied moments, e.g. Jiang & Tian (2005), Prokopczuk & Wese Simen (2014), and Kourtis
et al. (2016), for realized variance. We exploit the theoretical results of Bakshi et al. (2003)
to construct the risk-neutral (i) variance (VARBKM ), (ii) skewness (SKEW BKM ), and (iii)
excess kurtosis (EXKURT BKM ):
VARBKM = erτV−µ2
τ , (3)
SKEW BKM = erτW− 3µerτV + 2µ3
[erτV−µ2]3/2 , (4)
EXKURT BKM = erτX− 4µerτW + 6erτµ2V− 3µ4
[erτV−µ2]2 − 3, (5)
6

wherer denotes the continuously compounded (annualized) interest rate for the period from
t tot+τ. We use the Ivy curve from OptionMetrics to proxy for the interest rate. Essentially,
this curve is based on London Interbank Oﬀered Rate (LIBOR) and Eurodollar futures. 2 τ
indicates the time to expiration of each option, expressed as a fraction of a year. Note that
all variables are contemporaneously observed. In the expressions above V ,W ,X, and µ are
deﬁned as follows:
V =
∫ S
K=0
2(1 + log[S
K ])
K2 P (K)dK +
∫ ∞
K=S
2(1− log[K
S ])
K2 C(K)dK, (6)
W =
∫ ∞
K=S
6 log[K
S ]− 3(log[K
S ])2
K2 C(K)dK−
∫ S
K=0
6 log[S
K ] + 3(log[S
K ])2
K2 P (K)dK, (7)
X =
∫ ∞
K=S
12(log[K
S ])2 + 4(log[K
S ])3
K2 C(K)dK +
∫ S
K=0
12(log[S
K ])2 + 4(log[S
K ])3
K2 P (K)dK, (8)
µ = erτ− 1− erτ
2 V− erτ
6 W− erτ
24X, (9)
whereK andS are the strike and spot prices, respectively. C(K) andP (K) denote the call
and put prices of strike K, respectively. All other variables are as previously deﬁned.
At the end of each calendar month, we use the OptionMetrics database to extract the
standardized options data of 1-month maturity, the contemporaneous spot price, and the
interest rate of corresponding maturity. We retain only out-of-the-money option prices. It is
worth pointing out that the integrals in the formulas above implicitly assume the existence
of a wide range of strike prices. Alas, this is not perfectly true in the market. Thus, we follow
Chang et al.

rth pointing out that the integrals in the formulas above implicitly assume the existence
of a wide range of strike prices. Alas, this is not perfectly true in the market. Thus, we follow
Chang et al. (2012) by computing a ﬁne grid of 1,000 equidistant interpolated moneyness
levels, i.e. K/S, ranging from 1 % to 300 %. For each moneyness level on that grid, we
interpolate the implied volatility using a spline interpolation method. For moneyness levels
outside of the moneyness range observed in the market, we extrapolate the implied volatilities
2We use this interest rate curve to be consistent with the empirical literature on option prices (e.g., Bali
& Hovakimian, 2009; McGee & McGroarty, 2017). Obviously, one may wonder if our main results hold if
we substitute the OptionMetrics curve with the term-structure of Treasury rates. The eﬀect on our main
ﬁndings is negligible. The intuition behind this result is that most of our analysis focuses on options of short
time to maturity. Because the interest rate is always multiplied by the time to maturity, we ﬁnd that the
interest rate proxy has very little impact on our results.
7

(Jiang & Tian, 2005). In practice, this means that if a moneyness level is lower (higher)
than the lowest (highest) moneyness level available in the market, we simply use the implied
volatility corresponding to the lowest (highest) level of moneyness available in the market.
Next, we plug the implied volatilities into the Black & Scholes (1973) option pricing model
to obtain the corresponding out-of-the-money option prices. Finally, we follow Bali et al.
(2017) by using a trapezoidal rule to approximate the integrals that appear in the formulas
above and obtain the risk-neutral moments of 1-month maturity.
Variance Risk Premium The variance risk premium is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between
the risk-neutral and physical expectations of variance:
VRP t =EQ
t (σ2
t+1)−EP
t (σ2
t+1), (10)
where Et(·) is the expectation operator conditional on the information available at time t.
The superscripts Q and P indicate that the expectation is computed under the risk-neutral
and physical measures, respectively. In order to proxy for the risk-neutral expectation of
variance, we use VARBKM . This choice is motivated by Du & Kapadia (2012) who show
that the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) is robust to jumps.
While the expression above clearly deﬁnes the variance risk premium, it is of very little
practical use. The reason for this is that it involves the physical expectation of future
variance, which is not directly observable. Therefore, we follow the lead of Bollerslev et al.

of very little
practical use. The reason for this is that it involves the physical expectation of future
variance, which is not directly observable. Therefore, we follow the lead of Bollerslev et al.
(2009) and Driessen et al. (2013) in positing a simple random walk model for the future
variance under the physical measure. That is, we assume that the expectation of the future
variance under the physical measure equals its most recent realization. Thus, we can compute
the VRP as follows:
VRP t =VARBKM
t −RVt. (11)
8

Note that all variables are annualized and observed at the end of each calendar month.
Correlation Risk Premium Driessen et al. (2013) establish the predictive power of the
correlation risk premium for future aggregate stock returns. The authors observe that the
equity index is a portfolio of individual equities (Driessen et al., 2009). An upshot of this
is that the variance of the market index return is equal to the weighted average variance
of individual stocks and covariance terms. Assuming further that the pairwise correlation
between diﬀerent stocks is the same for all stocks, they are able to derive the following
formula:
ICt =
EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
Ψ,s ds]−∑Θ
ψ=1ω2
ψ EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
∑Θ
ψ=1
∑
χ̸=ψωψωχ
√
EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
√
EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
χ,s ds]
, (12)
where ICt is the implied correlation at time t. Θ denotes the number of stocks in the
stock market. EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
Ψ,s ds] and EQ
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds] are the risk-neutral expected variance
of the index (Ψ) and of the individual stock ( ψ), respectively. As before, we proxy these
expectations with the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003).wψ andwχ are the weights
of stocks ψ and χ in the market index Ψ, respectively.
The intuition developed above also holds under the physical measure, thus yielding the
following formula for the realized correlation at time t:
RCt =
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
Ψ,s ds]−∑Θ
ψ=1ω2
ψ EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
∑Θ
ψ=1
∑
χ̸=ψωψωχ
√
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
√
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
χ,s ds]

he
following formula for the realized correlation at time t:
RCt =
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
Ψ,s ds]−∑Θ
ψ=1ω2
ψ EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
∑Θ
ψ=1
∑
χ̸=ψωψωχ
√
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
ψ,s ds]
√
EP
t [
∫t+τ
t σ2
χ,s ds]
, (13)
whereRCt is the realized correlation at time t. All other variables are as previously deﬁned.
As before, we use the historical variance computed over the most recent period to proxy for
the physical expectation of the future variance.
TheCRP at timet is then deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral and physical
9

expectations of future correlation, yielding the following result:
CRPt =ICt−RCt. (14)
To obtain this variable, we use standardized options (of time to maturity of one month)
on the S&P 500 index as well as options data on all constituents of the index. All options
are observed at the end of each calendar month.
Implied Volatility Smirk Measure Xing et al. (2010) document the predictive power
of the implied volatility smirk.3 Our construction of this variable broadly mirrors theirs. At
the end of each calendar month, we retain all S&P 500 index options with positive open
interest and a time to maturity between 10 and 60 days. We discard all option prices with a
midquote price below $0.125. We also purge all options with implied volatility outside of the
interval [3 %; 200 %]. We deﬁne the out-of-the-money put options as the put options with
a moneyness level between 0.8 and 0.95. Note that by moneyness level, we understand the
ratio of the strike price over the stock price, i.e. K/S. Relatedly, we deﬁne at-the-money call
options as call options with a moneyness level between 0.95 and 1.05. The smirk measure is
simply computed as follows:
SMIRK t =VOL OTMP
t −VOL ATMC
t , (15)
whereSMIRK t is the smirk measure at time t. VOL OTMP
t denotes the implied volatility of
out-of-the-money puts. To be more precise, this is the volume-weighted average of the implied
volatilities of all out-of-the-money put options. VOL ATMC
t refers to the volume-weighted
3Xing et al.

of
out-of-the-money puts. To be more precise, this is the volume-weighted average of the implied
volatilities of all out-of-the-money put options. VOL ATMC
t refers to the volume-weighted
3Xing et al. (2010) analyze the predictive ability of the implied volatility smirk in the cross-section of
stock returns. Motivated by the intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) of Merton (1973), if
SMIRK is priced in the cross-section, it also has to predict the investment opportunity set in the time series
(Maio & Santa-Clara, 2012).
10

average of all implied volatilities of at-the-money calls at time t.
Risk-Neutral Riskiness Leiss & Nax (2018) apply the result of Foster & Hart (2009) to
the risk-neutral density of the S&P 500 index to derive an option-implied riskiness measure.
We follow Leiss & Nax (2018) and ﬁrst obtain the risk-neutral density of the S&P 500
using the approach of Figlewski (2010). That is, for the center of the distribution, i.e. the
moneyness range observed in the market, we interpolate the implied volatilities using a 4th
order spline with one knot at-the-money, computing the density using the corresponding
Black & Scholes (1973) option prices. Finally, we parameterize the distributions of the left
and right tails by separately ﬁtting Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distributions. Using
the obtained distribution, we compute the risk-neutral Foster–Hart (FH) riskiness measure
by solving the following equation:
∫ ∞
ST =0
log(1 +ST−S0
S0
FH )f(ST )dST = 0, (16)
where ST and S0 are the stock prices at expiration and t = 0, respectively. f(ST ) is the
risk-neutral density at ST . We numerically compute the integral using a trapezoidal rule
and repeat this procedure on every trading day. Leiss & Nax (2018) remark that in some
cases, Equation (16) does not have a solution,FH∈ (0, 1), in which case they setFH to 1 if
the option-implied expected return (
∫∞
ST =0
ST−S0
S0
f(ST )dST ) is positive. If the option-implied

n some
cases, Equation (16) does not have a solution,FH∈ (0, 1), in which case they setFH to 1 if
the option-implied expected return (
∫∞
ST =0
ST−S0
S0
f(ST )dST ) is positive. If the option-implied
return is negative and Equation (16) does not have a solution, we set FH to 0. FH may be
interpreted as the fraction of wealth that can be invested in an asset so that no-bankruptcy
is guaranteed. For this measure, we use data on traded option prices for all options on the
S&P 500 for maturities between 10 and 50 days, each day picking the time to maturity
11

closest to 30 days. 4 For the empirical tests, we follow Leiss & Nax (2018) and use a 21-day
moving average of FH instead of the raw measure.
Generalized Measure of Riskiness Based on both Foster & Hart (2009) and Aumann
& Serrano (2008), Bali et al. (2011) introduce a generalized measure of riskiness ( GMR).
We obtainGMR by solving the equation:
∫ S
K=0
fR(K)P (K)dK +
∫ ∞
K=S
fR(K)C(K)dK− rτ
1 +rτ
1
GMR = 0, (17)
with
fR(K) = (1−δ)
S2GMR 2
(
1 +K/S− 1
GMR
)δ−2
. (18)
Following Bali et al. (2011), we setδ =−2. All other variables are as previously deﬁned. We
compute the integrals for each trading day as described in the paragraph “Option-Implied
Moments” using the standardized options with time to maturity of one month.
III. Main Results
Before discussing our main ﬁndings, it is instructive to look at the summary statistics
reported in Table I. We can observe a positive market risk premium of around 6 % p.a. The
risk premium exhibits a standard deviation of around 16 % p.a. We also notice that the
sample moments of the VRP and the CRP are consistent with those reported in previous
works (Driessen et al., 2009, 2013). In particular, we can see that although positive on
average, theVRP is negatively skewed and prone to extreme movements as indicated by its
high kurtosis, suggesting a sign-switching behavior. This observation could carry important
4For most measures in this study, we rely on the standardized options, provided by OptionMetrics.

ed by its
high kurtosis, suggesting a sign-switching behavior. This observation could carry important
4For most measures in this study, we rely on the standardized options, provided by OptionMetrics.
However, these are not suitable to obtain the entire risk-neutral density because they do not provide
observations for deep out-of-the-money options which are necessary to accurately parametrize the GEV
distributions.
12

implications for the predictive ability of this variable. We shall return to this point later.
The table also reports the AR(1) coeﬃcient of each variable. We notice that the
autoregressive coeﬃcient of these variables is typically lower than that of the valuation ratios
such as the (log) dividend to price ratio routinely analyzed in empirical works, e.g. Goyal &
Welch (2003). This suggests that our analysis does not suﬀer from the statistical issues that
aﬀect these earlier works. We can also see that the AR(1) coeﬃcient of the realized variance
is much higher than that of the market risk premium, likely indicating that there might be
a stronger evidence of predictability in the realized variance series than in the market excess
returns.
Table II presents the sample correlation coeﬃcients among all the predictive variables.
While most variables are only weakly correlated, there is a high correlation between
SKEW BKM and EXKURT BKM (–0.92). This suggests that these variables contain very
similar information.
III.A Return Predictability
In-Sample Analysis We start by assessing the in-sample predictability of the equity risk
premium. To do so, we estimate the standard regression model of the month-ahead excess
return on a constant and the predictive variable(s):
ERt+1 =β0 +β1Xt +ϵt+1, (19)
where ERt+1 is the excess return on the market realized at the end of month t + 1. β0
and β1 are the intercept and slope parameters, respectively. Xt represents the forecasting

=β0 +β1Xt +ϵt+1, (19)
where ERt+1 is the excess return on the market realized at the end of month t + 1. β0
and β1 are the intercept and slope parameters, respectively. Xt represents the forecasting
variable(s) observed at the end of month t. Finally, ϵt+1 is the regression error term at t + 1.
Table III summarizes the results for each predictive variable. The regression model
enables us to ascertain whether the equity risk premium is time-varying or constant. Under
13

the null hypothesis that the future excess return cannot be predicted using Xt, we would
expect thatβ1 = 0. As a result, the expected market excess return would simply be constant.
One implication of this is that the best estimate of the future excess return is simply its
recursive mean. If there is evidence of predictability, we would expect to see that the slope
loading is statistically signiﬁcant. To avoid a small-sample bias (Stambaugh, 1999) and serial
correlation in the error terms (Richardson & Stock, 1989), we base our statistical inference
on the bootstrapped distribution obtained by implementing the framework of Rapach &
Wohar (2006).5
We can see that the CRP , GMR, SMIRK , and VRP are statistically signiﬁcant
predictors in the univariate regressions. This is documented by their t-statistics of 2.76,
2.09, –2.06, and 4.26, respectively. The positive and signiﬁcant slope estimate related to the
VRP conﬁrms and updates, using a more recent sample period, the result of Bollerslev et al.
(2009). It is also consistent with the authors’ intuition that the VRP encodes information
about time-variations in economic uncertainty. Note also that if, as argued by Driessen et al.
(2013),CRP accounts for most of theVRP , then one would expect thatCRP predicts future
excess returns with a positive sign as we ﬁnd in the data, since it has been documented that
the VRP predicts the market excess return (Bollerslev et al., 2009).

would expect thatCRP predicts future
excess returns with a positive sign as we ﬁnd in the data, since it has been documented that
the VRP predicts the market excess return (Bollerslev et al., 2009).
The result that CRP predicts future returns is consistent with that in Driessen et al.
(2009, 2013). There is a strong relationship between correlations and returns. It seems that
correlations between stocks are time-varying and that correlations increase when returns are
5We estimate the process under the null hypothesis of no predictability, i.e. ERt = a0 + ϵ1,t and
Xt =b0 +b1 Xt−1 +ϵ2,t, where a0, b0, and b1 are the regression coeﬃcients and ϵ1,t and ϵ2,t are the error
terms, respectively. We then form a series of error terms and set up our pseudo sample. For the pseudo
sample, we compute the in-sample and out-of-sample statistics. Finally, we repeat this procedure 1,000
times. In the case of multiple regressions, we adjust the procedure by taking the multiple variables into
account and, in-sample, by using the F -statistic rather than the individual t-statistic.
14

low.6,7 Moreover, the authors document a strong predictive power of IC for future returns,
supported by a correlation of 0.24 betweenIC andVRP , shown in Table II.8 Pollet & Wilson
(2010) provide evidence for the predictive power of (average) realized correlations for stock
returns at a quarterly horizon.
The result of GMR for predicting future market returns conﬁrms the ﬁndings of Bali
et al. (2015). The authors ﬁnd that GMR acts as a signiﬁcant positive in-sample predictor
of future aggregate market returns. The positive sign is consistent with the interpretation of
GMR as a fundamental measure of risk: higher riskiness is associated with higher aggregate
excess returns in the future.
The ﬁnding thatSMIRK predicts future returns with a negative sign extends the results
of Xing et al. (2010) to the time series of the market excess return. The intuition behind this
result is simple. An increase in SMIRK implies a stronger demand for out-of-the-money
put options. This increased demand signals that investors are actively purchasing insurance
against expected declines in the stock index. The negative slope estimate of SMIRK is
consistent with this intuition.
It is also worth comparing the predictive power of individual variables. A cursory look
at the in-sample R2 reveals that VRP has the highest predictive power for future excess
returns (R2 = 7.47 %). The second most powerful predictor is the CRP , with an R2 of
3.28 %.

les. A cursory look
at the in-sample R2 reveals that VRP has the highest predictive power for future excess
returns (R2 = 7.47 %). The second most powerful predictor is the CRP , with an R2 of
3.28 %. While the slope estimate on the VRP is similar to that documented by Bollerslev
6They show that an increase in market correlations has two main eﬀects. First, diversiﬁcation possibilities
are lower, thus, investors face limitations in their portfolio formations and suﬀering from a welfare reduction.
Second, there is a rise in market volatility. One implication is that index options become relatively expensive
compared to individual options. They represent a hedge against changes in market correlations, thus, also
against losses due to diversiﬁcation limitations.
7The use of CRP (and of IC andRC) can be theoretically motivated by the ICAPM of Merton (1973).
It directly aﬀects future investment opportunities, i.e. investors’ future diversiﬁcation beneﬁts as well as the
market variance. Moreover, Driessen et al. (2013) argue thatCRP appears to drive the volatility of dividend
growth, and also the volatility of dividend growth volatility, consistent with the argument of Bollerslev et al.
(2009) for VRP . One implication is that CRP matters for both return as well as variance predictability.
8Driessen et al. (2009, 2013) document that IC strictly exceeds RC, indicating the existence of a large
CRP . Our data support these ﬁndings.

atters for both return as well as variance predictability.
8Driessen et al. (2009, 2013) document that IC strictly exceeds RC, indicating the existence of a large
CRP . Our data support these ﬁndings. We observe a mean IC (RC) of 41.66 % (32.25 %), generating a
mean CRP of 9.41 %.
15

et al. (2009), it is worth noticing that the predictive power we document at the monthly
horizon is much higher, indicating that, if anything, the predictive ability of the VRP is
much stronger in the more recent sample period.
It is worthwhile to analyze the performance of individual variables over time. Figure 1
plots the in-sample cumulative diﬀerences in squared forecast errors (CDSFE). 9 We observe
a similar (in-sample) performance in the case of the CRP and VRP , indicated by a sharp
increase during the global ﬁnancial crisis in 2008/2009, and a steady rise during the post
crisis period. The ﬁndings suggest the outperformance of the unrestricted model to the
restricted model, particularly in times of distress. It seems that investors can exploit the
information content of both variables in times of high risk-aversion.
In the case of EXKURT BKM and SKEW BKM , we ﬁnd an increase in performance
during the global ﬁnancial crisis; however, afterwards there is a steady decline, suggesting
the superior performance of the restricted model. Both variables appear to have substantial
predictive power, particularly in crises. The CDFSE plot for GMR indicates that most of
the predictive power stems from economic downturns.
SMIRK shows the strongest increase in the CDSFE plot during the global ﬁnancial crisis,
indicating that investors look for a hedge against a further market downturn, by buying put
options.

downturns.
SMIRK shows the strongest increase in the CDSFE plot during the global ﬁnancial crisis,
indicating that investors look for a hedge against a further market downturn, by buying put
options. Finally, in the case of VARBKM , we see no strong ﬂuctuations in its CDSFE,
suggesting a similar performance of both the unrestricted and restricted model. Generally,
we also ﬁnd a strong increase in the performance after the dot-com bubble in 2001. This is
true for all variables, except SMIRK .
To analyze the joint predictive ability of diﬀerent variables, we perform three multiple
regressions. Due to the high correlation between SKEW BKM and EXKURT BKM , we run
9Please note that whenever there is a rise of the in-sample (or out-of-sample) performance, the
unrestricted model outperforms the restricted model, and vice versa. In this case, a variable provides a
better forecast than the benchmark model.
16

the regressions also once without the ﬁrst and once without the second variable. 10 In all
cases we ﬁnd that only SMIRK and VRP retain their statistical signiﬁcance. 11 Overall,
the adjusted R2 increases to 8.81 %, 8.95 %, and 8.59 % in the ﬁrst, second, and third case,
respectively.
Out-of-Sample Results We now turn our focus to the out-of-sample evidence of return
predictability. We use an initial training window of 5 years to ﬁrst estimate the forecasting
model presented in Equation (19). Equipped with the parameter estimates and the most
recent observation of the forecasting variable in the training window, we are able to generate
the ﬁrst excess return forecast. The following month, we expand the training window by
one observation month and re-estimate the forecasting model. With the new parameter
estimates, we forecast the market excess return for the next month. We proceed analogously
for all months, except the last month of our sample period.
In order to assess the out-of-sample performance of diﬀerent models, we follow Campbell
& Thompson (2008) and deﬁne the out-of-sample R2 (R2
oos) as follows:
R2
oos = 1− MSEu
MSEr
, (20)
where MSEu and MSEr are the mean squared errors of the unrestricted and restricted
models, respectively. The unrestricted model is based on Equation (19). The restricted
model imposes the null hypothesis that returns are unpredictable, i.e. β1 = 0. Thus the R2
oos

ed and restricted
models, respectively. The unrestricted model is based on Equation (19). The restricted
model imposes the null hypothesis that returns are unpredictable, i.e. β1 = 0. Thus the R2
oos
sheds light on the question: How large an improvement in forecast accuracy can one achieve
by accounting for the predictive power of variable Xt? The higher the R2
oos the better. A
10We present the results of the multiple regressions only for return predictability. In the case of realized
variance predictability, we skip these regressions due to multicollinearity.
11The CRP does not retain its statistical signiﬁcance in the multiple regressions. It seems that other
variables, mainly the VRP , capture its information. In-sample multiple regressions have no explanatory
power for out-of-sample predictability. For further details, wee also refer to the forthcoming out-of-sample
analysis.
17

variable has notable predictive power if it exhibits a positive and signiﬁcant R2
oos, indicating
an overall outperformance of the predictive variable.
In order to gauge whether the potential improvement is statistically signiﬁcant, we
compute the MSE−F statistic of McCracken (2007):
MSE−F =H×
(MSEr−MSEu
MSEu
)
, (21)
whereH denotes the number of out-of-sample forecasts. All other variables are as previously
deﬁned. Brieﬂy, the null hypothesis is that the restricted model performs at most as well
as the unrestricted model, i.e. MSEr≤ MSEu. The alternative is that the unrestricted
model provides smaller forecast errors than the restricted model. As can be seen from the
last row of Table III, only CRP andVRP yield statistically signiﬁcant improvements in the
out-of-sample performance relative to the simple recursive mean. This result is noteworthy
given that Goyal & Welch (2003) argue that the recursive mean is a tough benchmark to beat.
Overall, these results suggest that the CRP and the VRP contain important information
about next-month’s market excess returns both in- and out-of-sample. In contrast, the
multiple regressions do not improve the predictive power out-of-sample. In Figure 1, we
observe a similar development of the out-of-sample performances as in-sample, except for
VARBKM , showing a sharp drop during the global ﬁnancial crisis, indicating a superior
performance of the restricted model. It seems that investors have to rely on the historical

n-sample, except for
VARBKM , showing a sharp drop during the global ﬁnancial crisis, indicating a superior
performance of the restricted model. It seems that investors have to rely on the historical
mean rather than on VARBKM in times of distress.
III.B Variance Predictability
We now turn our attention to the predictability of the realized variance. In particular,
we ask the question: Can any of the forecasting variables be used to predict next-month’s
realized variance?
18

In-Sample Using all the sample information, we estimate the following regression model:
RVt+1 =γ0 +γ1Xt +γ2RVt +ϵt+1, (22)
whereγ0,γ1, andγ2 are the intercept and slope parameters, respectively. All other variables
are as previously deﬁned. We include the lag of realized variance, because realized variance
is a strongly persistent process, indicated by its AR(1) coeﬃcient of 0.63, shown in Table
I.12 To account for the persistence, we use a ﬁtted AR(1) process as naive benchmark rather
than the historical mean variance. 13
Table IV summarizes the results of the in-sample analysis. We notice that the
variables have predictive power for future realized variance, as evidenced by their statistically
signiﬁcantR2s.14 This is true for all variables, except FH and GMR. The R2s range from
40.80 % to 43.03 %. These results are interesting for several reasons. First, they indicate
that the predictability of realized variance is much stronger than that of excess returns.
Second, they reveal that CRP , SMIRK , and VRP are able to predict (in-sample) not
only next-month’s market excess return (see Table III) but also realized variance. Third,
the risk-neutral variables of Bakshi et al. (2003) that do not predict future excess returns
matter for realized variance forecasting. For instance,EXKURT BKM predicts next-month’s
realized variance with a predictive power equal to 41.60 %. GMR appears to predict only
market returns, whereas FH predicts neither market returns nor realized variance.

KURT BKM predicts next-month’s
realized variance with a predictive power equal to 41.60 %. GMR appears to predict only
market returns, whereas FH predicts neither market returns nor realized variance. A likely
cause for the rather poor performance of the two measures is that both variables exhibit
clear breakpoints, especially around the ﬁnancial crisis (see the time-series of these variables
for example in Figure 1 of Bali et al. (2015) as well as Figure 1 of Leiss & Nax (2018)).
12Since realized variance is strongly persistent, future realized variance is primarily predictable by its
current value. Ignoring the lag of realized variance allows the other lagged variables to partially capture this
persistence. In particular VAR BKM andRV are highly correlated. We refer to this point later in Table IV.
13In Section V.C , we use the historical mean variance as naive benchmark and show the results.
14Although CRP has a t-statistic of –1.59, this variable generates a statistically signiﬁcant improvement
in the in-sample R2 of 40.80 %. We also refer to Section V.C .
19

An implication of this result is that when assessing the information content of a predictive
variable, it is advisable to investigate whether it predicts not only excess returns but also
realized variance. We observe that VARBKM and VRP have similar t-statistics and R2s,
which is not surprising due to the construction of VRP and the used regression model in
Equation (22).
Figure 2 shows the CDSFE for all individual variables predicting the next month’s
realized variance. There is a similar pattern for the variables. We observe a strong
increase in their performance during the global ﬁnancial crisis in 2008/2009, indicating the
outperformance of the unrestricted model to the restricted model. It seems that investors
can exploit the information content of the variables, particularly in times of high variance.
Out-of-Sample We use the ﬁrst 5 years of observations to initially estimate the model
parameters (see Equation (22)). Having done this, we then make a forecast for the following
month. We expand the training window by one observation month and repeat all steps. This
procedure mirrors that used for the return predictability analysis with the only diﬀerence
that we assume a ﬁtted AR(1) process as naive benchmark and that we forecast realized
variance rather than the market excess return. The last row of Table IV shows the R2
ooss.
All variables that predict realized variance in-sample are also good predictors out-of-sample.
TheR2

ealized
variance rather than the market excess return. The last row of Table IV shows the R2
ooss.
All variables that predict realized variance in-sample are also good predictors out-of-sample.
TheR2
ooss range from 2.40 % forSKEW BKM to 3.89 % forSMIRK . In Figure 2, we observe
a similar pattern as in-sample. In particular in times of distress, investors should rely on the
information content of the predictive variables rather than on the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1)
model.
III.C Portfolio Choice Implications
We now study the portfolio choice implications of the predictability results reported
earlier. To do this, we consider an investor with mean–variance preferences. The agent
20

allocates a fraction ωt of her wealth to the risky portfolio and the remainder, i.e. 1 −ωt, to
the risk-free asset. The agent’s objective function is:
max
wt
EP
t
(
rp,t+1− γ
2σ2
p,t+1
)
, (23)
whereEP
t (·) is the physical expectation operator.rp,t+1 is the next-period’s (simple) return on
the investor’s portfolio. γ is the coeﬃcient of relative risk-aversion. σ2
p,t+1 is the conditional
variance of the portfolio from t to t + 1. This return is the weighted average of the (simple)
return on the risky stock and on the risk-free asset. Because our earlier analysis focuses on
log-returns rather than simple returns, we use a second-order Taylor expansion to express the
simple return as a function of the log-return and realized variance. 15 Thus, we can express
the objective function as follows:
max
wt
Et
(
Rp,t+1− γ− 1
2 σ2
p,t+1
)
, (24)
whereRp,t+1 is the log-return on the portfolio and all other variables are as previously deﬁned.
Using the ﬁrst-order condition, it is straightforward to derive the optimal weight invested
in the risky asset (Jordan et al., 2014):
ωt = Et(ERt+1 + 1
2RVt+1)
γEt(RVt+1) = Et(ERt+1)
γEt(RVt+1) + 1
2γ. (25)
The expression above shows that the optimal allocation to the risky asset depends on the
expected excess return, the risk-aversion parameter, and the expected realized variance. One
implication of this expression is that, holding everything else constant, the allocation to the

nds on the
expected excess return, the risk-aversion parameter, and the expected realized variance. One
implication of this expression is that, holding everything else constant, the allocation to the
15More precisely, the approximation yields the following relationship:
Rt≈rt− 1
2RV t,
where Rt, rt, and RV t are the log-return, simple return, and realized variance at time t, respectively.
21

risky stock rises with expected returns. In other words, if realized variance is unpredictable
and a forecasting variable Xt positively (negatively) predicts excess returns, then the agent
would invest more (less) in the risky stock as Xt increases. In contrast, if a variable Xt
positively predicts future variance (and not returns), then the share of wealth invested in
the risky stock decreases with the variable Xt.
Note that the preceding discussion focuses only on the predictability of either returns
or variance and does not explore the case where both moments are predictable by the same
variable. The share of the position in the stock will be determined by two (potentially
oﬀsetting) forces, one that increases with the expected excess return and the other that
decreases with the expected realized variance.
In light of the preceding discussion, we ﬁnd it interesting to distinguish between three
cases. The ﬁrst one deals with the case where only excess returns might be predictable. The
second case allows for the predictability of realized variance alone. The third case deals with
the possibility that both excess returns and realized variance are predictable by the same
variableXt.16
For a given case (ξ) and each calendar month of our out-of-sample window, we compute
the weight ωt and also the realized return of the portfolio. We impose the restriction that
whenever the forecast of the market excess return or of the realized variance (or of both) in

w, we compute
the weight ωt and also the realized return of the portfolio. We impose the restriction that
whenever the forecast of the market excess return or of the realized variance (or of both) in
Equation (25) equals zero, we set the portfolio weight equal to 1 /(2γ). Further, following
Campbell & Thompson (2008) and Jordan et al. (2017), we impose the restriction that ωt
is bounded from below by 0 and from above by 1.5. Economically, the lower bound implies
that the agent does not short-sell the risky asset. The upper bound prevents the agent from
taking on excessive leverage. At the end of the sample period, we compute the certainty
16To be consistent with Section III.B, we predict realized variance by the variable Xt and the lag of
realized variance.
22

equivalent return as follows:
CER (ξ) = ¯rp− γ
2σ2
p, (26)
where CER (ξ) is the certainty equivalent return associated with strategy ξ. This number is
expressed in percent per annum. ¯rp is the average (annualized) return on the portfolio. σ2
p
is the variance of the portfolio returns.
Our approach consists in computing the utility gain (∆CER (ξ)), the diﬀerence between
CER (ξ) and the certainty equivalent return of the naive strategy that assumes that the ﬁrst
two moments are unpredictable, and thus relies on simple historical averages. We do this for
each of the three scenarios.
We also compute the Sharpe Ratio (SR) of each strategy ξ:
SR(ξ) =
¯Rp−rf
σ2
p
, (27)
where ¯Rp is the average log-return on the portfolio. Similar to the certainty equivalent return
analysis, we compute the improvement in SR by taking the diﬀerence between SR(ξ) and
theSR linked to the naive strategy that assumes that the market excess return and realized
variance are unpredictable. We use an approach suggested by Jobson & Korkie (1981), and
after taking into account the correction suggested by Memmel (2003), we test whether the
improvement is statistically signiﬁcant.
Table V reports our results for diﬀerent values of risk-aversion. We can see that
statistical evidence of excess return predictability does not necessarily imply important
economic gains. For instance, while the VRP predicts both excess returns and realized

ersion. We can see that
statistical evidence of excess return predictability does not necessarily imply important
economic gains. For instance, while the VRP predicts both excess returns and realized
variance, a timing strategy relying on this variable would have underperformed the naive
strategy. One possible explanation for this result is the following. Shortly before the crisis
23

period, the variance risk premium is high (since the historical variance is low). Because the
VRP predicts future returns with a positive sign, this result implies that an agent should
hold more (rather than less) stocks. As a result of this increased position, the strategy incurs
more severe losses as the economy slides into recession. Similarly, as the economy recovers,
the variance risk premium is low, implying that the agent should hold a small position in
the stock. Because of this, the agent misses out on the rally in the market. Further, it seems
that, though VRP predicts both returns and variance individually with a positive sign,
the joint predictability is associated with large variance, thus generating negative certainty
equivalent returns.17
In contrast, one can see that relative to an agent with risk-aversion γ = 3 who assumes
that the market excess return and the realized variance are unpredictable, the agent who
exploits the information content of the CRP , would improve her utility by 5.03 % p.a. The
ﬁnding is consistent with Driessen et al. (2009, 2013) who document that index options
represent a hedge against changes in market correlations, and also against losses due to
diversiﬁcation limitations.
Our results are in line with those of Fleming et al. (2001), who show that volatility
timing leads to notable utility gains for short-horizon investors. The positive economic value
generated by the CRP is consistent with the work of Buss et al.

g et al. (2001), who show that volatility
timing leads to notable utility gains for short-horizon investors. The positive economic value
generated by the CRP is consistent with the work of Buss et al. (2018), who document
a positive CER for the market timing strategy based on the CRP . Overall, our ﬁndings
suggest that investors might earn larger utility gains when taking the predictability of both
excess returns and realized variance into account.
Table A1 of the Online Appendix shows the portfolio choice implications taking into
account turnover and transaction costs. Following DeMiguel et al. (2009), we deﬁne the
17We refer to Section IV.B for further details.
24

turnover for strategy ξ as the average sum of the absolute values of the trades, i.e.:
Turnover = 1
T−H
T−H∑
t=1
(
|ω(ξ)
t+1−ω(ξ)
t+|
)
, (28)
where T−H is the number of out-of-sample observations and ω(ξ)
t+ is the portfolio weight
before rebalancing at t + 1. All other variables are as previously deﬁned. For the benchmark
strategy, we observe an absolute value of the turnover (Turnoverabs) of 0.0448, which can be
interpreted as the average percentage of wealth traded in each out-of-sample period. For our
three strategies, we report the turnover ( Turnover (ξ)
rel) relative to the benchmark case. We
notice that all strategies exhibit higher turnovers than the benchmark, indicated by values
larger than one.
We follow Balduzzi & Lynch (1999) and include transaction costs of 50 basis points per
transaction proportional to the asset’s traded size |ω(ξ)
t+1−ω(ξ)
t+|. Table A1 of the Online
Appendix reports the corresponding utility gains and Sharpe Ratios. We observe that
transaction costs have an impact on the results; however, the results are qualitatively similar.
An agent who relies on the CRP would still improve her utility by 1.38 % p.a.
IV. Further Analyses
IV.A Sign Restriction
Campbell & Thompson (2008) propose imposing two economically motivated restric-
tions when studying the question of predictability. The authors suggest setting the slope
estimate in the out-of-sample analysis equal to zero whenever its sign diﬀers from that of
the in-sample analysis.

s when studying the question of predictability. The authors suggest setting the slope
estimate in the out-of-sample analysis equal to zero whenever its sign diﬀers from that of
the in-sample analysis. They also suggest setting the out-of-sample forecast equal to zero
whenever its negative. Before discussing our ﬁndings, it is worth emphasizing that the ﬁrst
constraint is not implementable in real-time. This is because the implementation would
25

require the agent to know about the sign of the in-sample slope parameter, i.e. to have
information about future data, thus, introducing a look-ahead bias.
The ﬁrst set of results in Table VI reports the ﬁndings when imposing the ﬁrst restriction.
Panel A shows that the main results are similar: the CRP and VRP are the two best
option-implied predictors for the market excess return. It is worth noticing that imposing
the restriction has very little eﬀect on the R2
oos related to the forecasting variables (see Table
III for comparison). This suggests that the sign of the relationship between the forecasting
variablesCRP and VRP and future excess returns is relatively stable out-of-sample.
We also impose the restriction on the slope of the realized variance forecasting regression.
In other words, we set the slope estimate equal to zero, if the sign of the recursively estimated
parameter is diﬀerent from that obtained in-sample. 18 Overall, we can see from Panel B of
Table VI that this restriction has very little impact on our main results.
The second set of results in Table VI reports the ﬁndings when imposing the second
restriction. Finally, the last entries of each panel show the results when we jointly impose
the restrictions (on the sign of the slope and the sign of the return/variance forecast).
Summarized, in both cases our main results remain unchanged. 19 We also repeat our
economic value analysis using these economically motivated constraints. Tables VII to IX

return/variance forecast).
Summarized, in both cases our main results remain unchanged. 19 We also repeat our
economic value analysis using these economically motivated constraints. Tables VII to IX
document that imposing the restriction(s) does (do) not aﬀect our main conclusions on the
economic value of the predictive power of both CRP and VRP .
18To be consistent with Section III.B, we impose the restriction for both the variable Xt and the lag of
realized variance.
19Table A2 of the Online Appendix reports the absolute frequency of how often the restrictions are
binding. Panel A shows the results for return predictability. We observe that the ﬁrst restriction is not
binding. This is true for all variables, except FH ,GMR, and VAR BKM , indicated by a frequency of 12, 8,
and 35. The second restriction is binding more frequently, indicated by frequencies from 7 forGMR to 77 for
VRP . It seems that the forecast restriction matters more for excess return predictability. Panel B of Table
A2 shows the frequencies in the case of variance predictability. We ﬁnd that the ﬁrst (second) restriction
is binding only for CRP , FH , and GMR (EXKURT BKM ) with a frequency of 75, 76, and 3 (3). Lagged
realized variance appears to be not aﬀected by the (ﬁrst) restriction(s) at all, indicating the persistence of
that variable. The ﬁndings reveal that the imposition of economically motivated restrictions matters more
for return rather than variance predictability.
26

IV.B Forecast Combination
Rapach et al. (2010) suggest the use of forecast combinations. The pooled forecast
is the weighted average of all G individual forecasts, where g = 1,...,G , i.e., ˆER
pool
t+1 =
∑G
g=1xg,tˆERg,t+1 and ˆRV
pool
t+1 = ∑G
g=1xg,tˆRVg,t+1, based on Equation (19) and (22),
respectively. xg,t is the weight of the individual forecast in the pooled one.
Following the literature, we use three approaches. Table X shows the out-of-sampleR2s
of (i) the mean forecast combination, where the weight is simply 1/G forg = 1,...,G , (ii) the
median forecast combination, where the pooled forecast is just the median of all individual
forecasts, and (iii) the trimmed mean forecast combination, where xg,t = 0 in the case of the
individual forecasts with the smallest and largest value, respectively, and xg,t = 1/(G− 2)
for the remaining forecasts.
The mean forecast combination exhibits superior performance in the case of return
predictability (R2
oos = 1.76 %), whereas the median forecast combination works better in the
case of variance predictability ( R2
oos = 4.12 %).20 The ﬁndings are interesting for several
reasons. First, they support the results of Rapach & Zhou (2013), who argue that forecast
combinations yield more stable forecasts and increase the forecasting performance. Second,
the ﬁndings show a substantial increase in the magnitude of the R2
ooss. In the case of
return predictability, the mean forecast combination generates anR2
oos which is substantially

ormance. Second,
the ﬁndings show a substantial increase in the magnitude of the R2
ooss. In the case of
return predictability, the mean forecast combination generates anR2
oos which is substantially
larger than for all individual variables, except for VRP .21 The median forecast combination
outperforms all individual variables, predicting realized variance. Third, the ﬁndings support
our previous conclusion. It seems that individual predictive variables generate notable
20Since FH and GMR show an overall weak performance, we additionally compute the forecast
combinations without these two variables. In that case, the mean forecast combination exhibits a superior
performance, indicated by an R2
oos of 3.11 %, whereas the median forecast combination generates an R2
oos of
4.83 %.
21In detail, when using all predictive variables of our sample, the mean forecast combination generates an
R2
oos which is similar to all individual variables, except forVRP . However, by excluding FH andGMR, the
mean forecast combination generates an R2
oos which is substantially larger than for all individual variables,
except for VRP .
27

variance when predicting excess returns and realized variance, respectively.
Table XI reports the economic value for diﬀerent values of risk-aversion. Compared
with our previous ﬁndings, all forecast combinations, in particular the median forecast
combination, generate substantial certainty equivalent returns. For γ = 3, an annualized
utility gain of 6.73 % (relative to the naive strategy) may be achieved, when both return and
variance are predicted by the combined forecast. It seems that forecast combinations rather
than individual variables, generate more stable forecasts, thus, leading to signiﬁcant positive
utility gains.
IV.C Predictability of the Sharpe Ratio
After predicting excess returns and realized variance in isolation, we want to answer the
question: What predictive power do the variables have, when predicting excess returns and
realized variance jointly? In doing so, we estimate the following regression model:
ERt+1√
RVt+1
=ϕ0 +ϕ1Xt +ϵt+1, (29)
where ERt+1√
RVt+1
is the Sharpe Ratio, and ϕ0, and ϕ1 are the intercept and slope parameters,
respectively. All other variables are as previously deﬁned.
Table XII documents the results for each predictive variable. The regression model
(29) enables us to assess whether each variable has predictive power, when predicting excess
returns and realized variance jointly. We ﬁnd that CRP , GMR, SKEW BKM , and VRP
have predictive power for the future Sharpe Ratios, shown by their statistically signiﬁcant

er, when predicting excess
returns and realized variance jointly. We ﬁnd that CRP , GMR, SKEW BKM , and VRP
have predictive power for the future Sharpe Ratios, shown by their statistically signiﬁcant
t-statistics of 2.43, 1.77, –1.79, and 2.17. A look at the in-sample R2s reveals thatCRP and
VRP have the highest (in-sample) predictive power of 2.56 % and 2.04 %, respectively.
Further analysis reveals thatCRP andVRP also contain important information about
the future Sharpe Ratio out-of-sample, indicated by R2
ooss of 2.99 % and 1.54 %.
28

V. Additional Analysis
To use more information when estimating the realized variance, we follow Corsi (2009)
and S´ evi (2014) and use the heterogenous autoregressive ( HAR) model. The HAR–RV
model provides a conditional estimate for realized variance that accounts for diﬀerent trading
horizons. Further, in the previous analysis, we examine the total variance risk premium.
However, Andersen & Bondarenko (2010), Andersen et al. (2015), and Feunou et al. (2015)
show how to decompose the variance risk premium into downside and upside components.
In the following section, we analyze the predictability of both components separately.
We follow Andersen & Bondarenko (2010) and Andersen et al. (2015) and use the
downside and upside model-free implied variance. Following the arguments of Feunou et al.
(2015), investors dislike increases in the volatility of the underlying, which is associated
with an increase in the probability of severe losses. Investors hedge against these downward
movements, thus, we expect that the downside variance risk premium is the main driver of
the variance risk premium. Further, to get a better estimate for the physical expectation of
variance, we analogously use the downside and upside realized variance.
V.A Variables
Variance Risk Premium based on HAR–RV Model We deﬁne the variance risk
premium based on theHAR–RV model (VRP HAR) as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral
variance (VARBKM ) and the RV , estimated on the basis of the HAR model (RVHAR):

Model We deﬁne the variance risk
premium based on theHAR–RV model (VRP HAR) as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral
variance (VARBKM ) and the RV , estimated on the basis of the HAR model (RVHAR):
VRP HAR
t =VARBKM
t −RVHAR
t , (30)
29

where VARBKM
t is as previously deﬁned. Analogously to Section II.B and using Equation
(2), we follow Christoﬀersen (2012) and deﬁne
RVD,t+ i
N
≡RVt+ i
N
, (31)
RVW,t+ i
N
≡RV(t+ i
N )−4,t+ i
N
=
[
RV(t+ i
N )−4 +RV(t+ i
N )−3 +RV(t+ i
N )−2 +RV(t+ i
N )−1 +RVt+ i
N
]
/ 5,
(32)
RVM,t+ i
N
≡RV(t+ i
N )−20,t+ i
N
=
[
RV(t+ i
N )−20 +RV(t+ i
N )−19 +... +RVt+ i
N
]
/ 21 (33)
as the daily, weakly, and monthly realized variance on day t + i
N , respectively.22 Further,
RV(t+ i
N )+1,(t+ i
N )+20 is the realized variance over the next 21 days, i.e.:
RV(t+ i
N )+1,(t+ i
N )+20 =
[
RV(t+ i
N )+1 +RV(t+ i
N )+2 +... +RV(t+ i
N )+20
]
/ 21. (34)
Finally, to compute RVHAR
t , we run the following regression:
RV(t+ i
N )+1,(t+ i
N )+20 =φ0 +φDRVD,t+ i
N
+φWRVW,t+ i
N
+φMRVM,t+ i
N
+ϵ(t+ i
N )+1,(t+ i
N )+20,
(35)
where φ0, φD, φW , and φM are the regression coeﬃcients, and ϵ(t+ i
N )+1,(t+ i
N )+20 is the error
term over the next 21 days. The ﬁtted values are the forecasted RV and represent RVHAR
t .
Downside and Upside Variance Risk Premium We deﬁne the downside and upside
variance risk premium ( VRP DOWN and VRP UP ) as the diﬀerence between the downside
and upside model-free implied variance (( σQ−
t )2 and (σQ+
t )2) and the downside and upside
22Since we now work with daily rather than intraday data, we follow the common approach and deﬁne
one month as 21 trading days.
30

realized variance (RVDOWN and RVUP ), respectively:
VRP DOWN
t =
(
σQ−
t
)2
−RVDOWN
t , (36)
VRP UP
t =
(
σQ+
t
)2
−RVUP
t . (37)
To obtain (σQ−
t )2 and (σQ+
t )2, we follow Andersen & Bondarenko (2010) and Andersen et al.
(2015) and use their corridor implied volatility method to decompose the model-free implied
variance into diﬀerent parts, and deﬁne the model-free implied variance (( σQ
t )2) as:
(
σQ
t
)2
= 2
∫ ∞
0
M(K)
K2 dK = (σQ−
t )2 + (σQ+
t )2, (38)
where M(K) = min (P (K),C (K)) is the minimum price of the put and call with maturity
of 1 month and strike K. Consistently, we also compute the grid of 1,000 equidistant
interpolated moneyness levels of out-of-the money option prices, as described above. Finally,
to compute (σQ−
t )2 and (σQ+
t )2, we assume the threshold Seθ with θ = 0:
(
σQ−
t
)2
= 2
∫ Seθ
0
M(K)
K2 dK, (39)
(
σQ+
t
)2
= 2
∫ ∞
Seθ
M(K)
K2 dK. (40)
We then use the trapezoidal rule to approximate the integrals, as outlined above.
Following Barndorﬀ-Nielsen et al. (2010), we decompose the realized variance into the
upside and downside realized variance for a given threshold κ. Imposing κ = 0, we compute
RVDOWN
t (RVUP
t ) on the basis of Equation (2), however, using only log-returns that are at
most (least) equal to κ.
Downside and Upside Variance Risk Premium based on HAR–RV Model We
deﬁne the downside and upside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model
31

(VRP DOWN,HAR and VRP UP,HAR ) as the diﬀerence between the downside and upside
model-free implied variance (( σQ−
t )2 and (σQ+
t )2) and the downside and upside realized
variance, estimated on the basis of the HAR model ( RVDOWN,HAR and RVUP,HAR ),
respectively:
VRP DOWN,HAR
t =
(
σQ−
t
)2
−RVDOWN,HAR
t , (41)
VRP UP,HAR
t =
(
σQ+
t
)2
−RVUP,HAR
t , (42)
where (σQ−
t )2 and (σQ+
t )2 are as previously deﬁned. To compute RVDOWN,HAR
t (RVUP,HAR
t ),
we follow the steps described above, however, using RVDOWN (RVUP ) instead of RV .
V.B Results
Table A3 of the Online Appendix reports the regression results for the diﬀerent
speciﬁcations predicting the next month’s excess return and realized variance, respectively.
In Panel A, we observe that all speciﬁcations exhibit an inferior performance in predicting
excess returns compared to the VRP as proposed by Bollerslev et al. (2009). However,
we notice that VRP UP , VRP DOWN , and VRP UP,HAR have still (in-sample) signiﬁcant
predictive power, indicated by t-statistics between 2.47 and 2.17, and in-sample R2s from
2.65 % to 2.05 %.
In Panel B of Table A3 of the Online Appendix, we ﬁnd that all speciﬁcations have a
similar (insigniﬁcant) in-sample predictive power for RV as VRP . We observe noteworthy
signiﬁcant out-of-sample predictability for VRP HAR (R2
oos = 3.40 %), VRP DOWN (R2
oos =
4.34 %), and VRP UP,HAR (R2
oos = 4.63 %).
We now turn our attention to the portfolio choice implications. Table A4 of the Online

mple predictability for VRP HAR (R2
oos = 3.40 %), VRP DOWN (R2
oos =
4.34 %), and VRP UP,HAR (R2
oos = 4.63 %).
We now turn our attention to the portfolio choice implications. Table A4 of the Online
Appendix reports the results of the economic value. For an agent with risk-aversion ofγ = 3,
we observe thatVRP UP (VRP DOWN ) provides substantial improvements in the utility gain
32

of 6.74 % p.a. (6.31 % p.a.) and in the Sharpe Ratio of 0.71 (0.59).
Overall, the results conﬁrm our previous ﬁndings in providing evidence for a stronger
variance than return predictability. We also observe that VRP DOWN , VRP UP , and
VRP UP,HAR predict in-sample both returns and realized variance. In addition, we notice that
VRP HAR, VRP DOWN , and VRP UP,HAR strongly predict realized variance out-of-sample.
Finally, the results reveal that VRP UP and VRP DOWN provide evidence for generating
statistically signiﬁcant economic value.
V.C Alternative Approach of Variance Predictability
In our main analysis, we included lagged realized variance as an additional predictor
when predicting realized variance, as it is well known that variance is a persistent process.
To see whether our results are driven by this choice, we repeat the analysis without including
lagged realized variance. We now estimate the following regression model for realized
variance:
RVt+1 =γ0 +γ1Xt +ϵt+1, (43)
where all variables are as previously deﬁned. Under the null hypothesis of no predictability,
the variable Xt has no predictive power for future realized variance. In this case, we
expect that γ1 = 0, and that the best estimate for future realized variance would be its
mean. Accordingly, the historical mean variance serves as benchmark model. Using this
speciﬁcation, we are able to analyze the individual predictive power of variables subject
to the standard approach in extant literature.

historical mean variance serves as benchmark model. Using this
speciﬁcation, we are able to analyze the individual predictive power of variables subject
to the standard approach in extant literature. Tables A5 and A6 of the Online Appendix
summarize the results of the predictability and economic value analysis.
In Table A5, we ﬁnd that all variables, except FH , have in-sample predictive power
for future realized variance. CRP turns out to have signiﬁcant predictive ability, indicated
by a t-statistic of –3.72. We notice that the in-sample R2s are smaller compared with our
33

previous results. They range from 3.19 % for SKEW BKM to 38.83 % for VARBKM .
In the out-of-sample analysis, we observe that in general the variables that predict
realized variance in-sample are also predictors out-of-sample. All variables, with the
exception of FH , GMR, and VRP , yield an improvement relative to the recursive mean.
The reason for the poor behavior of these three variables is likely twofold: FH and GMR
perform poorly in general and the VRP exhibits a sign-switching behavior as discussed
previously. The R2
ooss range from 1.88 % for CRP to 34.65 % for VARBKM . It seems that,
using the standard methodology, the predictive power of some variables increases, compared
to our previous results.
In the economic value analysis, shown in Table A6, we ﬁnd similar results as before.
It seems that statistical evidence of predictability does not necessarily imply important
economic gains. One can see that relative to an agent with risk-aversion γ = 3 who assumes
that the market excess return and the realized variance are unpredictable, the agent who
exploits the information content of CRP would improve her utility by 4.63 % p.a. Overall,
the results conﬁrm our previous ﬁndings.
VI. Conclusion
This paper comprehensively studies the predictive power of option-implied variables for
future excess returns and realized variance. A variable is considered to have predictive power
if it exhibits statistically signiﬁcant forecasting power and also adds economic value. We

variables for
future excess returns and realized variance. A variable is considered to have predictive power
if it exhibits statistically signiﬁcant forecasting power and also adds economic value. We
ﬁnd that the correlation risk premium and the variance risk premium emerge as statistically
signiﬁcant predictors of both the market excess return and the realized variance. This is
true both in- and out-of-sample.
We then investigate the economic value of the documented predictability. Our results
highlight an important contrast between the two variables. Relative to a naive strategy that
34

assumes that excess returns and realized variance are unpredictable, the agent who relies
on the correlation risk premium as a timing signal realizes utility gains of 5.03 % p.a. In
contrast, the timing strategy that uses the variance risk premium as timing signal yields lower
certainty equivalent returns than a naive strategy that assumes constant excess returns and
realized variance. Thus, our analysis shows that statistical evidence of predictability does
not necessarily translate into economic value. Moreover, we ﬁnd that forecast combinations
generate stable forecasts for both excess returns and realized variance, and that they add
substantial economic value.
We further decompose the total variance risk premium into the downside and upside
components, and analyze the predictability of diﬀerent versions of the variance risk premium.
We show that the upside and downside variance risk premia have noteworthy (in-sample)
predictive power for excess returns and realized variance. Further, a timing strategy provides
substantial utility gains.
Future research could analyze the predictive power of option-implied variables for
speciﬁc industry returns as well as diﬀerent asset classes. Furthermore, we believe that
it would be interesting to study whether the CRP performs similarly well in predicting
equity returns in further developed and emerging markets. Finally, it could be interesting to

e, we believe that
it would be interesting to study whether the CRP performs similarly well in predicting
equity returns in further developed and emerging markets. Finally, it could be interesting to
test whether forward-looking option-implied information drives out the predictive power of
U.S. returns for developed and emerging countries, as documented by Rapach et al. (2013).
35

Bibliography
Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., & Labys, P. (2003). Modeling and forecasting
realized volatility. Econometrica, 71 (2), 579–625.
Andersen, T. G., & Bondarenko, O. (2010). Dissecting the pricing of equity index volatility.
Working Paper .
Andersen, T. G., Bondarenko, O., & Gonzalez-Perez, M. T. (2015). Exploring return
dynamics via corridor implied volatility. Review of Financial Studies , 28 (10), 2902–2945.
Aumann, R. J., & Serrano, R. (2008). An economic index of riskiness. Journal of Political
Economy, 116 (5), 810–836.
Bakshi, G., Kapadia, N., & Madan, D. (2003). Stock return characteristics, skew laws, and
the diﬀerential pricing of individual equity options. Review of Financial Studies , 16 (1),
101–143.
Balduzzi, P., & Lynch, A. W. (1999). Transaction costs and predictability: Some utility cost
calculations. Journal of Financial Economics , 52 (1), 47–78.
Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., & Chabi-Yo, F. (2011). A generalized measure of riskiness.
Management Science, 57 (8), 1406–1423.
Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., & Chabi-Yo, F. (2012). Does aggregate riskiness predict future
economic downturns? Working Paper .
Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., & Chabi-Yo, F. (2015). A new approach to measuring riskiness in
the equity market: Implications for the risk premium. Journal of Banking & Finance , 57 ,
101–117.
Bali, T. G., & Hovakimian, A. (2009). Volatility spreads and expected stock returns.
Management Science, 55 (11), 1797–1812.
Bali, T. G., Hu, J., & Murray, S.

rnal of Banking & Finance , 57 ,
101–117.
Bali, T. G., & Hovakimian, A. (2009). Volatility spreads and expected stock returns.
Management Science, 55 (11), 1797–1812.
Bali, T. G., Hu, J., & Murray, S. (2017). Option implied volatility, skewness, and kurtosis
and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Working Paper .
Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O. E., Kinnebrock, S., & Shephard, N. (2010). Volatility and time series
econometrics: Essays in honor of Robert Engle . Oxford University Press.
Black, F., & Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of
Political Economy, 81 (3), 637–654.
Bollerslev, T., Marrone, J., Xu, L., & Zhou, H. (2014). Stock return predictability and
variance risk premia: Statistical inference and international evidence. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis , 49 (3), 633–661.
Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., & Zhou, H. (2009). Expected stock returns and variance risk
premia. Review of Financial Studies , 22 (11), 4463–4492.
36

Buss, A., Sch¨ onleber, L., & Vilkov, G. (2018). Expected stock returns and the correlation
risk premium. Working Paper .
C ¸ akmaklı, C., & van Dijk, D. (2016). Getting the most out of macroeconomic information
for predicting excess stock returns. International Journal of Forecasting , 32 (3), 650–668.
Campbell, J. Y., & Thompson, S. B. (2008). Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average? Review of Financial Studies , 21 (4), 1509–1531.
Chang, B.-Y., Christoﬀersen, P., Jacobs, K., & Vainberg, G. (2012). Option-implied
measures of equity risk. Review of Finance , 16 , 385–428.
Christoﬀersen, P. F. (2012). Elements of ﬁnancial risk management . 2nd Edition. Academic
Press.
Corsi, F. (2009). A simple approximate long-memory model of realized volatility. Journal
of Financial Econometrics , 7 (2), 174–196.
Cosemans, M. (2011). The pricing of long and short run variance and correlation risk in
stock returns. Working Paper .
Cremers, M., & Weinbaum, D. (2010). Deviations from put-call parity and stock return
predictability. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Finance , 45 (2), 335–367.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversiﬁcation: How
ineﬃcient is the 1/n portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies , 22 (5), 1915–1953.
Drechsler, I., & Yaron, A. (2011). What’s vol got to do with it. Review of Financial Studies ,
24 (1), 1–45.
Driessen, J., Maenhout, P. J., & Vilkov, G. (2009).

Financial Studies , 22 (5), 1915–1953.
Drechsler, I., & Yaron, A. (2011). What’s vol got to do with it. Review of Financial Studies ,
24 (1), 1–45.
Driessen, J., Maenhout, P. J., & Vilkov, G. (2009). The price of correlation risk: Evidence
from equity options. Journal of Finance , 64 (3), 1377–1406.
Driessen, J., Maenhout, P. J., & Vilkov, G. (2013). Option-implied correlations and the
price of correlation risk. Working Paper .
Du, J., & Kapadia, N. (2012). The tail in the volatility index. Working Paper .
Feunou, B., Jahan-Parvar, M. R., & Okou, C. (2015). Downside variance risk premium.
Working Paper .
Figlewski, S. (2010). Estimating the implied risk neutral density. In T. Bollerslev, J. Russell,
& M. Watson (Eds.) Volatility and Time Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert
Engle. Oxford University Press.
Fleming, J., Kirby, C., & Ostdiek, B. (2001). The economic value of volatility timing.Journal
of Finance, 56 (1), 329–352.
Foster, D. P., & Hart, S. (2009). An operational measure of riskiness. Journal of Political
Economy, 117 (5), 785–814.
37

Goyal, A., & Welch, I. (2003). Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios.
Management Science, 49 (5), 639–654.
Goyal, A., & Welch, I. (2008). A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity
premium prediction. Review of Financial Studies , 21 (4), 1455–1508.
Jiang, G. J., & Tian, Y. S. (2005). The model-free implied volatility and its information
content. Review of Financial Studies , 18 (4), 1305–1342.
Jobson, J. D., & Korkie, B. M. (1981). Performance hypothesis testing with the Sharpe and
Treynor measures. Journal of Finance , 36 (4), 889–908.
Jordan, S. J., Vivian, A., & Wohar, M. E. (2017). Forecasting market returns: Bagging or
combining? International Journal of Forecasting , 33 (1), 102–120.
Jordan, S. J., Vivian, A. J., & Wohar, M. E. (2014). Forecasting returns: New European
evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance , 26 , 76–95.
Kourtis, A., Markellos, R. N., & Symeonidis, L. (2016). An international comparison of
implied, realized, and GARCH volatility forecasts. Journal of Futures Markets , 36 (12),
1164–1193.
Leiss, M., & Nax, H. H. (2018). Option-implied objective measures of market risk. Journal
of Banking & Finance , 88 , 241–249.
Leiss, M., Nax, H. H., & Sornette, D. (2015). Super-exponential growth expectations and
the global ﬁnancial crisis. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 55 , 1–13.
Maio, P., & Santa-Clara, P. (2012). Multifactor models and their consistency with the
ICAPM. Journal of Financial Economics , 106 (3), 586–613.

. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 55 , 1–13.
Maio, P., & Santa-Clara, P. (2012). Multifactor models and their consistency with the
ICAPM. Journal of Financial Economics , 106 (3), 586–613.
McCracken, M. W. (2007). Asymptotics for out of sample tests of Granger causality. Journal
of Econometrics, 140 (2), 719–752.
McGee, R. J., & McGroarty, F. (2017). The risk premium that never was: A fair value
explanation of the volatility spread. European Journal of Operational Research , 262 (1),
370–380.
Memmel, C. (2003). Performance hypothesis testing with the Sharpe ratio. Finance Letters,
1 (1).
Merton, R. C. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica, 41 (5),
867–887.
Pollet, J. M., & Wilson, M. (2010). Average correlation and stock market returns. Journal
of Financial Economics , 96 (3), 364–380.
Prokopczuk, M., & Wese Simen, C. (2014). The importance of the volatility risk premium
for volatility forecasting. Journal of Banking & Finance , 40 , 303–320.
38

Pyun, S. (2016). Variance risk in aggregate stock returns and time-varying return
predictability. Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics .
Rapach, D. E., Strauss, J. K., & Zhou, G. (2010). Out-of-sample equity premium prediction:
Combination forecasts and links to the real economy. Review of Financial Studies , 23 (2),
821–862.
Rapach, D. E., Strauss, J. K., & Zhou, G. (2013). International stock return predictability:
What is the role of the united states? Journal of Finance , 68 (4), 1633–1662.
Rapach, D. E., & Wohar, M. E. (2006). In-sample vs. out-of-sample tests of stock return
predictability in the context of data mining.Journal of Empirical Finance, 13 (2), 231–247.
Rapach, D. E., & Zhou, G. (2013). Forecasting stock returns. Handbook of Economic
Forecasting, 2 (Part A), 328–383.
Rehman, Z., & Vilkov, G. (2012). Risk-neutral skewness: Return predictability and its
sources. Working Paper .
Richardson, M., & Stock, J. H. (1989). Drawing inferences from statistics based on multiyear
asset returns. Journal of Financial Economics , 25 (2), 323–348.
S´ evi, B. (2014). Forecasting the volatility of crude oil futures using intraday data.European
Journal of Operational Research, 235 (3), 643–659.
Stambaugh, R. F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics , 54 (3),
375–421.
Stilger, P. S., Kostakis, A., & Poon, S.-H. (2016). What does risk-neutral skewness tell us
about future stock returns? Management Science, 63 (6), 1814–1834.

f Financial Economics , 54 (3),
375–421.
Stilger, P. S., Kostakis, A., & Poon, S.-H. (2016). What does risk-neutral skewness tell us
about future stock returns? Management Science, 63 (6), 1814–1834.
Xing, Y., Zhang, X., & Zhao, R. (2010). What does the individual option volatility smirk tell
us about future equity returns? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 45 (3),
641–662.
Zhou, H. (2013). On the predictive power of the implied correlation index. Working Paper .
39

Figure 1: Return Predictability
This ﬁgure plots the in- and out-of-sample performances of individual variables. We regress monthly
excess returns on a constant and the lagged predictive variable. On the ordinate, there are the
cumulative diﬀerences in squared forecast errors (CDSFE). The in-sample performance is the
diﬀerence between the cumulative squared demeaned excess return and the cumulative squared
regression residual, and the out-of-sample performance is the diﬀerence between the cumulative
squared forecast error from the restricted model and the cumulative squared forecast error from the
unrestricted model. The grey bars indicate the U.S. recessions, published by the NBER. All data
are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
(a) CRP
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(b) EXKURT BKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(c) FH
2000 2005 2010 2015
−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(d) GMR
2000 2005 2010 2015
−5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(e) SKEW BKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(f) SMIRK
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(g) VARBKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−2.5 −1.5 −0.5 0.0 0.5
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(h) VRP
2000 2005 2010 2015
−1 0 1 2 3 4
Y ear

1.0 1.5 2.0
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(g) VARBKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−2.5 −1.5 −0.5 0.0 0.5
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(h) VRP
2000 2005 2010 2015
−1 0 1 2 3 4
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
40

Figure 2: Variance Predictability
This ﬁgure plots the in- and out-of-sample performances of individual variables. We regress monthly
realized variance on a constant, the lagged predictive variable, and the lagged realized variance.
On the ordinate, there are the cumulative diﬀerences in squared forecast errors (CDSFE). The
in-sample performance is the diﬀerence between the cumulative squared demeaned excess return
and the cumulative squared regression residual, and the out-of-sample performance is the diﬀerence
between the cumulative squared forecast error from the restricted model and the cumulative squared
forecast error from the unrestricted model. The grey bars indicate the U.S. recessions, published by
the NBER. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
(a) CRP
2000 2005 2010 2015
0.000 0.010 0.020 0.030
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(b) EXKURT BKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
0.000 0.010 0.020
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(c) FH
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.008 −0.004 0.000
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(d) GMR
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.03 −0.02 −0.01 0.00
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(e) SKEW BKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(f) SMIRK
2000 2005 2010 2015
0.000 0.010 0.020 0.030
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(g) VARBKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.005 0.005 0.015 0.025
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(h) VRP

SMIRK
2000 2005 2010 2015
0.000 0.010 0.020 0.030
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(g) VARBKM
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.005 0.005 0.015 0.025
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
(h) VRP
2000 2005 2010 2015
−0.005 0.005 0.015 0.025
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
Y ear
CDSFE
IS
OOS
41

Table I: Summary Statistics
This table summarizes key statistics about several variables. CRP denotes the correlation risk
premium. IC is the implied correlation. RC is the realized correlation. ER is the market excess
return. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral
riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of Bali
et al. (2011). RV is the realized variance. SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi
et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al.
(2003). VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral
variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. VRP HAR
denotes the variance risk premium based on the HAR-RV model. VRP DOW N is the downside
variance risk premium. VRP U P is the upside variance risk premium. VRP DOW N,HAR is the
downside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. Finally, VRP U P,HAR is the upside
variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. “Mean”, “Std Dev”, “Skew”, and “Kurt”
denote the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis, respectively. The last two columns
show the AR(1) coeﬃcient and the number of observations, respectively. All data are sampled at
the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Mean Std Dev Skew Kurt AR(1) Nobs
CRP 0.0941 0.1019 0.1409 3.2970 0.2496 228

d the number of observations, respectively. All data are sampled at
the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Mean Std Dev Skew Kurt AR(1) Nobs
CRP 0.0941 0.1019 0.1409 3.2970 0.2496 228
IC 0.4166 0.1403 0.5092 3.1725 0.7621 228
RC 0.3225 0.1398 0.8731 3.5571 0.5854 228
ER 0.0591 0.1555 -0.8294 4.4268 0.0900 228
EXKURT BKM 0.7571 0.2840 0.4887 3.0378 0.7522 228
FH 0.4302 0.3250 0.0241 1.4467 0.9250 228
GMR 9.0972 12.5814 2.3413 11.0123 0.8818 228
RV 0.0317 0.0519 7.3129 75.2277 0.6333 228
SKEW BKM -0.8698 0.1978 0.2588 3.0325 0.6611 228
SMIRK 0.1326 0.2522 0.1584 3.4828 0.3299 228
VAR BKM 0.0474 0.0427 3.3066 18.0518 0.7880 228
VRP 0.0157 0.0284 -5.0586 61.7528 0.1340 228
VRP HAR 0.0459 0.0414 3.2330 17.3103 0.7887 228
VRP DOW N -0.0136 0.0249 -7.5246 79.4665 0.5899 228
VRP U P -0.0143 0.0244 -7.5439 78.4141 0.6219 228
VRP DOW N,HAR 0.0016 0.0015 2.7589 13.2030 0.7708 228
VRP U P,HAR 0.0007 0.0007 1.7649 7.6611 0.5894 228
42

Table II: Correlation Matrix
This table reports the correlations among all predictive variables. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium. IC is the implied
correlation. RC is the realized correlation. ER is the market excess return. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi
et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of Bali
et al. (2011). RV is the realized variance. SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option
smirk. VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence
between the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. VRP HAR denotes
the variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. VRP DOW N is the downside variance risk premium. VRP U P is the
upside variance risk premium. VRP DOW N,HAR is the downside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. Finally,
VRP U P,HAR is the upside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and
relate to the S&P 500 index.
CRP
IC
RC
EXKURTBKM
FH
GMR
SKEWBKM
SMIRK
VARBKM
VRP
VRPHAR
VRPDOW N
VRPU P
VRPDOW N,HAR
VRPU P,HAR
CRP
IC 0.37
RC -0.36 0.74
EXKURT BKM 0.20 0.06 -0.09
FH -0.10 -0.48 -0.40 -0.17
GMR 0.09 0.66 0.59 0.07 -0.68
SKEW BKM -0.22 -0.24 -0.08 -0.92 0.20 -0.19
SMIRK -0.06 0.31 0.35 -0.02 -0.22 0.36 -0.10

CRP
IC 0.37
RC -0.36 0.74
EXKURT BKM 0.20 0.06 -0.09
FH -0.10 -0.48 -0.40 -0.17
GMR 0.09 0.66 0.59 0.07 -0.68
SKEW BKM -0.22 -0.24 -0.08 -0.92 0.20 -0.19
SMIRK -0.06 0.31 0.35 -0.02 -0.22 0.36 -0.10
VAR BKM -0.04 0.54 0.57 -0.38 -0.12 0.43 0.17 0.35
VRP 0.40 0.24 -0.05 -0.03 -0.01 0.11 0.02 -0.14 -0.02
VRP HAR -0.04 0.54 0.57 -0.38 -0.12 0.43 0.17 0.35 1.00 -0.01
VRP DOW N 0.26 -0.30 -0.49 0.29 0.09 -0.29 -0.12 -0.36 -0.82 0.59 -0.81
VRP U P 0.27 -0.29 -0.48 0.28 0.09 -0.26 -0.13 -0.36 -0.81 0.60 -0.80 0.98
VRP DOW N,HAR 0.06 0.62 0.58 -0.31 -0.18 0.51 0.09 0.33 0.97 0.17 0.97 -0.68 -0.67
VRP U P,HAR 0.18 0.44 0.31 -0.46 0.01 0.29 0.32 0.13 0.71 0.60 0.72 -0.24 -0.21 0.79
43

Table III: Return Predictability
This table reports the regression results of monthly excess returns on a constant, which we denote by β0, and the lagged predictive
variable(s). We report the t-statistics in parentheses. Statistical inferences are based on a bootstrapped distribution. The historical
mean serves as naive benchmark. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi
et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of
Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM is
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. R2 and R2
oos are the
in-sample and out-of-sample R2, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels,
respectively. The sample period extends from January 1996 to December 2014. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and
relate to the S&P 500 index.
β0
-0.032 -0.035 0.129** 0.004 -0.136 0.096** 0.056 -0.023 -0.119 -0.186 -0.219
(-0.67) (-0.34) (2.16) (0.10) (-0.84) (2.40) (1.05) (-0.59) (-0.77) (-0.97) (-1.03)
CRP 0.957*** 0.321 0.301 0.306
(2.76) (0.85) (0.79) (0.80)
EXKURT BKM 0.123 0.104 -0.138
(0.96) (0.73) (-0.36)

.219
(-0.67) (-0.34) (2.16) (0.10) (-0.84) (2.40) (1.05) (-0.59) (-0.77) (-0.97) (-1.03)
CRP 0.957*** 0.321 0.301 0.306
(2.76) (0.85) (0.79) (0.80)
EXKURT BKM 0.123 0.104 -0.138
(0.96) (0.73) (-0.36)
FH -0.164 -0.037 -0.040 -0.044
(-1.49) (-0.25) (-0.27) (-0.29)
GMR 0.006** 0.006 0.006 0.006
(2.09) (1.34) (1.28) (1.27)
SKEW BKM -0.224 -0.179 -0.351
(-1.22) (-0.93) (-0.68)
SMIRK -0.290** -0.357** -0.365** -0.370**
(-2.06) (-2.34) (-2.38) (-2.40)
VAR BKM 0.028 0.327 0.249 0.048
(0.03) (0.31) (0.25) (0.04)
VRP 5.176*** 4.015*** 4.032*** 3.991***
(4.26) (2.94) (2.96) (2.92)
R2 3.28*** 0.41 0.97 1.90* 0.66 1.84** 0.00 7.47*** 8.81*** 8.95*** 8.59***
R2
oos 2.81*** -1.22 -2.40 -10.29 -0.53 0.07 -5.41 5.50*** -23.14 -23.68 -25.42
44

Table IV: Variance Predictability
This table reports the regression results of monthly realized variance on a constant, which we denote
byγ0, the lagged predictive variable, and the lagged realized variance RV . We report the t-statistics
in parentheses. Statistical inferences are based on a bootstrapped distribution. The forecast of
a ﬁtted AR(1) model serves as naive benchmark. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium.
EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness
measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of Bali et al. (2011).
SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk.
VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk
premium computed as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the
most recent observation of the realized variance. R2 and R2
oos are the in-sample and out-of-sample
R2, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance
levels, respectively. The sample period extends from January 1996 to December 2014. All data are
sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
γ0 0.016*** 0.031*** 0.012** 0.011*** 0.035*** 0.010*** 0.002 0.002
(3.80) (3.57) (2.43) (3.28) (2.78) (2.98) (0.49) (0.49)
RV 0.612*** 0.596*** 0.633*** 0.631*** 0.621*** 0.585*** 0.374*** 0.750***

γ0 0.016*** 0.031*** 0.012** 0.011*** 0.035*** 0.010*** 0.002 0.002
(3.80) (3.57) (2.43) (3.28) (2.78) (2.98) (0.49) (0.49)
RV 0.612*** 0.596*** 0.633*** 0.631*** 0.621*** 0.585*** 0.374*** 0.750***
(11.51) (11.14) (12.20) (11.66) (12.01) (10.67) (4.06) (12.26)
CRP -0.043
(-1.59)
EXKURTBKM -0.024**
(-2.37)
FH 0.000
(-0.05)
GMR 0.000
(0.15)
SKEWBKM 0.026*
(1.91)
SMIRK 0.027**
(2.40)
VARBKM 0.376***
(3.37)
VRP 0.376***
(3.37)
R2 40.80** 41.60** 40.13 40.14 41.09** 41.64** 43.03** 43.03**
R2
oos 3.18*** 3.34*** -1.41 -5.42 2.40*** 3.89*** 3.78*** 3.78***
45

Table V: Economic Value
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios. Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is
unpredictable and that the forecasting variable [name in row] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess
returns are unpredictable but that the variable [name in row] and the lagged realized variance predict the realized variance. Scenario
3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and the realized variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in row],
and in the latter case, by both the forecasting variable [name in row] and the lagged realized variance. The historical mean return,
and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are
the annualized utility gains relative to a naive strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by
following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe
Ratios achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 %
signiﬁcance levels, respectively. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 -0.01 5.03 0.46** 0.13 0.39*
EXKURTBKM 5.39 2.83 6.39 0.51*** 0.29* 0.50**
FH 1.99 1.50 4.03 0.18 0.12* 0.30**

to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 -0.01 5.03 0.46** 0.13 0.39*
EXKURTBKM 5.39 2.83 6.39 0.51*** 0.29* 0.50**
FH 1.99 1.50 4.03 0.18 0.12* 0.30**
GMR -3.77 4.67 2.63 -0.12 0.25*** 0.22*
SKEWBKM 1.86 2.32 3.84 0.16 0.24* 0.30*
SMIRK 2.96 2.33 3.21 0.30 0.25** 0.27
VARBKM -7.28 6.39 -4.24 -0.42*** 0.38*** -0.19
VRP -6.10 7.80 -2.60 -0.41* 0.51*** -0.09
Panel B:γ=6
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 3.05 -4.27 2.29 0.45** -0.04 0.40*
EXKURTBKM 3.92 2.42 4.90 0.63*** 0.38** 0.62***
FH -0.05 -1.38 0.47 0.13 0.02 0.29*
GMR -8.82 3.00 -2.66 -0.35** 0.21*** 0.11
SKEWBKM 1.20 1.17 2.48 0.22 0.25** 0.41**
SMIRK 2.07 0.80 2.26 0.38* 0.22* 0.36
VARBKM -10.70 5.53 -5.54 -0.60*** 0.49*** -0.24
VRP -8.49 5.46 -8.16 -0.60*** 0.59*** -0.36
Panel C:γ=9
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.71 -5.26 0.96 0.40* -0.07 0.42*
EXKURTBKM 2.82 2.11 3.34 0.67*** 0.40*** 0.63**
FH -0.03 -1.87 -2.55 0.16 0.00 0.14
GMR -6.87 1.97 -3.71 -0.36** 0.18*** 0.03
SKEWBKM 0.58 0.87 0.74 0.20 0.24** 0.39*
SMIRK 1.40 0.50 1.69 0.38* 0.18* 0.40*
VARBKM -10.28 3.76 -4.09 -0.63*** 0.49*** -0.25
VRP -8.15 3.72 -7.67 -0.63*** 0.63*** -0.42*
Panel D:γ=12
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 -5.88 -0.14 0.40* -0.10 0.41
EXKURTBKM 2.11 1.75 2.29 0.67*** 0.40*** 0.64**
FH -0.05 -2.15 -3.87 0.16 -0.03 0.05
GMR -5.59 1.47 -2.95 -0.37** 0.18*** 0.03
SKEWBKM 0.44 0.50 -0.14 0.20 0.21** 0.38
SMIRK 1.05 0.36 1.21 0.38* 0.17* 0.40*

KM 2.11 1.75 2.29 0.67*** 0.40*** 0.64**
FH -0.05 -2.15 -3.87 0.16 -0.03 0.05
GMR -5.59 1.47 -2.95 -0.37** 0.18*** 0.03
SKEWBKM 0.44 0.50 -0.14 0.20 0.21** 0.38
SMIRK 1.05 0.36 1.21 0.38* 0.17* 0.40*
VARBKM -8.37 2.80 -3.12 -0.63*** 0.49*** -0.25
VRP -6.18 2.30 -6.73 -0.63*** 0.60*** -0.44*
46

Table VI: Out-of-Sample Analysis: Restriction
This table reports the results of the out-of-sample analysis after imposing economically motivated
restrictions. We report the MSE-F statistics in parenthesis. CRP denotes the correlation risk
premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi et al. (2003). FH is the risk-
neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of
Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is
the option smirk. VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is
the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi
et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. The historical mean return,
and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. “(I)”
denotes the imposition of the ﬁrst restriction, where we set the slope estimate in the out-of-sample
analysis equal to zero, whenever its sign diﬀers from that of the in-sample analysis. “(II)” denotes
the imposition of the second restriction, where we set the forecast equal to zero, whenever it is
negative. “(I+II)” denotes the joint imposition of both restrictions. R2
oos is the out-of-sample
R2. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels,
respectively. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.

f-sample
R2. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels,
respectively. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Return Predictability
CRP
EXKURT BKM
FH
GMR
SKEW BKM
SMIRK
VAR BKM
VRP
(I) R2
oos 2.81*** -1.22 -2.70 -3.27 -0.53 0.07 -3.84 5.50***
(4.83) (-2.02) (-4.39) (-5.30) (-0.87) (0.12) (-6.18) (9.73)
(II) R2
oos 2.69** 0.37 -1.40 -3.69 0.56 0.93 -3.39 4.43***
(4.61) (0.62) (-2.31) (-5.94) (0.95) (1.57) (-5.48) (7.74)
(I+II) R2
oos 2.69** 0.37 -1.38 -3.27 0.56 0.93 -2.95 4.43***
(4.61) (0.62) (-2.27) (-5.30) (0.95) (1.57) (-4.79) (7.74)
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
CRP
EXKURT BKM
FH
GMR
SKEW BKM
SMIRK
VAR BKM
VRP
(I) R2
oos 3.28*** 3.34*** -1.82 -11.23 2.40** 3.89*** 3.78*** 3.78***
(5.67) (5.77) (-2.98) (-16.87) (4.10) (6.76) (6.57) (6.57)
(II) R2
oos 3.18** 3.44*** -1.41 -5.42 2.40** 3.89*** 3.78*** 3.78**
(5.48) (5.95) (-2.32) (-8.58) (4.10) (6.76) (6.57) (6.57)
(I+II) R2
oos 3.28** 3.44** -1.82 -11.23 2.40** 3.89*** 3.78** 3.78**
(5.67) (5.95) (-2.98) (-16.87) (4.10) (6.76) (6.57) (6.57)
47

Table VII: Economic Value: Restriction I
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios, after imposing the ﬁrst economically motivated
restriction following Campbell & Thompson (2008). Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is unpredictable and that the
forecasting variable [name in row] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess returns are unpredictable but
that the variable [name in row] predicts the variance of market returns. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and
the realized variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in row]. The historical mean return, and the forecast of a
ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility
gains relative to a strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and
3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe Ratios achieved by following
strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively.
All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.12 6.87 0.46** 0.54*** 0.60***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 2.08 4.27 6.72 0.18 0.30*** 0.52***

P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.12 6.87 0.46** 0.54*** 0.60***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 2.08 4.27 6.72 0.18 0.30*** 0.52***
GMR -5.94 5.55 3.84 -0.21 0.32*** 0.30**
SKEWBKM 1.86 6.26 6.88 0.16 0.57*** 0.63***
SMIRK 2.96 5.00 4.88 0.30 0.55*** 0.52***
VARBKM -8.81 6.96 -1.53 -0.48*** 0.52*** -0.10
VRP -6.10 6.96 -4.33 -0.41* 0.55*** -0.35*
Panel B:γ=6
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 3.05 3.91 5.11 0.45** 0.44*** 0.69***
EXKURTBKM 3.92 4.58 6.46 0.63*** 0.59*** 0.90***
FH 0.00 1.64 3.46 0.13 0.19 0.49**
GMR -9.93 3.32 0.30 -0.41*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 1.20 4.11 5.60 0.22 0.53*** 0.80***
SMIRK 2.07 2.91 3.14 0.38* 0.51*** 0.57**
VARBKM -11.50 4.88 -0.85 -0.63*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -8.49 4.88 -2.80 -0.60*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel C:γ=9
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.71 2.61 3.33 0.40* 0.35*** 0.64**
EXKURTBKM 2.82 3.11 5.17 0.67*** 0.52*** 0.94***
FH 0.00 0.36 1.07 0.16 0.10 0.34
GMR -7.61 2.23 0.14 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.58 2.84 4.03 0.20 0.47*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.40 1.96 2.17 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -10.81 3.26 -0.58 -0.66*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -8.15 3.26 -1.88 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel D:γ=12
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 1.96 2.62 0.40* 0.30*** 0.66**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.03 0.22 -0.15 0.16 0.07 0.26
GMR -6.15 1.68 0.08 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.44 2.17 3.14 0.20 0.44*** 0.80***

.96 2.62 0.40* 0.30*** 0.66**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.03 0.22 -0.15 0.16 0.07 0.26
GMR -6.15 1.68 0.08 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.44 2.17 3.14 0.20 0.44*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.05 1.47 1.63 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -8.77 2.44 -0.44 -0.66*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -6.18 2.44 -1.42 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
48

Table VIII: Economic Value: Restriction II
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios, after imposing the second economically motivated
restriction following Campbell & Thompson (2008). Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is unpredictable and that the
forecasting variable [name in row] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess returns are unpredictable but
that the variable [name in row] predicts the variance of market returns. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and
the realized variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in row]. The historical mean return, and the forecast of a
ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility
gains relative to a strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and
3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe Ratios achieved by following
strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively.
All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.22 6.88 0.46** 0.55*** 0.61***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 1.99 4.68 7.11 0.18 0.32*** 0.56***

P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.22 6.88 0.46** 0.55*** 0.61***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 1.99 4.68 7.11 0.18 0.32*** 0.56***
GMR -3.77 5.55 4.32 -0.12 0.32*** 0.33**
SKEWBKM 1.86 6.26 6.88 0.16 0.57*** 0.63***
SMIRK 2.96 5.00 4.88 0.30 0.55*** 0.52***
VARBKM -7.28 6.96 -1.48 -0.42*** 0.53*** -0.10
VRP -6.10 6.96 -4.33 -0.41* 0.55*** -0.35*
Panel B:γ=6
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 3.05 3.81 5.02 0.45** 0.43*** 0.69***
EXKURTBKM 3.92 4.58 6.46 0.63*** 0.59*** 0.90***
FH -0.05 2.71 3.75 0.13 0.25*** 0.52**
GMR -8.82 3.32 0.54 -0.35** 0.29*** 0.18
SKEWBKM 1.20 4.11 5.60 0.22 0.53*** 0.80***
SMIRK 2.07 2.91 3.14 0.38* 0.51*** 0.57**
VARBKM -10.70 4.88 -0.82 -0.60*** 0.67*** -0.07
VRP -8.49 4.88 -2.80 -0.60*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel C:γ=9
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.71 2.54 3.23 0.40* 0.34*** 0.63**
EXKURTBKM 2.82 3.11 5.17 0.67*** 0.52*** 0.94***
FH -0.03 1.82 2.42 0.16 0.23*** 0.51**
GMR -6.87 2.23 0.31 -0.36** 0.29*** 0.18
SKEWBKM 0.58 2.84 4.03 0.20 0.47*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.40 1.96 2.17 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -10.28 3.26 -0.57 -0.63*** 0.67*** -0.07
VRP -8.15 3.26 -1.88 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel D:γ=12
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 1.91 2.55 0.40* 0.29*** 0.65**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.05 1.37 1.76 0.16 0.21*** 0.51**
GMR -5.59 1.68 0.21 -0.37** 0.29*** 0.18

) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 1.91 2.55 0.40* 0.29*** 0.65**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.05 1.37 1.76 0.16 0.21*** 0.51**
GMR -5.59 1.68 0.21 -0.37** 0.29*** 0.18
SKEWBKM 0.44 2.17 3.14 0.20 0.44*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.05 1.47 1.63 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -8.37 2.44 -0.43 -0.63*** 0.67*** -0.07
VRP -6.18 2.44 -1.42 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
49

Table IX: Economic Value: Restrictions I and II
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios, after imposing both economically motivated
restrictions following Campbell & Thompson (2008). Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is unpredictable and that the
forecasting variable [name in row] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess returns are unpredictable but
that the variable [name in row] predicts the variance of market returns. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and
the realized variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in row]. The historical mean return, and the forecast of a
ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility
gains relative to a strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and
3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe Ratios achieved by following
strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively.
All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.12 6.87 0.46** 0.54*** 0.60***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 2.08 4.27 6.72 0.18 0.30*** 0.52***

P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 6.12 6.87 0.46** 0.54*** 0.60***
EXKURTBKM 5.39 6.35 8.01 0.51*** 0.61*** 0.76***
FH 2.08 4.27 6.72 0.18 0.30*** 0.52***
GMR -5.94 5.55 3.84 -0.21 0.32*** 0.30**
SKEWBKM 1.86 6.26 6.88 0.16 0.57*** 0.63***
SMIRK 2.96 5.00 4.88 0.30 0.55*** 0.52***
VARBKM -8.81 6.96 -1.53 -0.48*** 0.52*** -0.10
VRP -6.10 6.96 -4.33 -0.41* 0.55*** -0.35*
Panel B:γ=6
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 3.05 3.91 5.11 0.45** 0.44*** 0.69***
EXKURTBKM 3.92 4.58 6.46 0.63*** 0.59*** 0.90***
FH 0.00 1.64 3.46 0.13 0.19 0.49**
GMR -9.93 3.32 0.30 -0.41*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 1.20 4.11 5.60 0.22 0.53*** 0.80***
SMIRK 2.07 2.91 3.14 0.38* 0.51*** 0.57**
VARBKM -11.50 4.88 -0.85 -0.63*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -8.49 4.88 -2.80 -0.60*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel C:γ=9
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.71 2.61 3.33 0.40* 0.35*** 0.64**
EXKURTBKM 2.82 3.11 5.17 0.67*** 0.52*** 0.94***
FH 0.00 0.36 1.07 0.16 0.10 0.34
GMR -7.61 2.23 0.14 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.58 2.84 4.03 0.20 0.47*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.40 1.96 2.17 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -10.81 3.26 -0.58 -0.66*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -8.15 3.26 -1.88 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
Panel D:γ=12
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 1.96 2.62 0.40* 0.30*** 0.66**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.03 0.22 -0.15 0.16 0.07 0.26
GMR -6.15 1.68 0.08 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.44 2.17 3.14 0.20 0.44*** 0.80***

.96 2.62 0.40* 0.30*** 0.66**
EXKURTBKM 2.11 2.35 4.05 0.67*** 0.47*** 0.93***
FH -0.03 0.22 -0.15 0.16 0.07 0.26
GMR -6.15 1.68 0.08 -0.42*** 0.29*** 0.16
SKEWBKM 0.44 2.17 3.14 0.20 0.44*** 0.80***
SMIRK 1.05 1.47 1.63 0.38* 0.49*** 0.58***
VARBKM -8.77 2.44 -0.44 -0.66*** 0.66*** -0.08
VRP -6.18 2.44 -1.42 -0.63*** 0.68*** -0.37*
50

Table X: Out-of-Sample Analysis: Forecast Combinations
This table reports the results of the out-of-sample analysis after the use of forecast combinations.
The mean forecast combination [MeanFC], the median forecast combination [MedianFC], and the
trimmed mean forecast combination [TrMeanFC] are used as alternative speciﬁcations. We report
the MSE-F statistics in parenthesis. The historical mean return, and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1)
model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks. Six forecasting variables are used. CRP
denotes the correlation risk premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi et al.
(2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized
measure of riskiness of Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi
et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi
et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized
variance. R2
oos is the out-of-sample R2. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 10 %,
5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and
relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Return Predictability
MeanFC
MedianFC
TrMeanFC
R2
oos 1.76*** 0.91** 1.36***
(2.99) (1.54) (2.31)
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
MeanFC
MedianFC
TrMeanFC
R2

d
relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Return Predictability
MeanFC
MedianFC
TrMeanFC
R2
oos 1.76*** 0.91** 1.36***
(2.99) (1.54) (2.31)
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
MeanFC
MedianFC
TrMeanFC
R2
oos 2.50*** 4.12*** 3.06***
(4.28) (7.18) (5.27)
51

Table XI: Economic Value: Forecast Combinations
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios based on forecast
combinations. Scenario 1 assumes that realized variance is unpredictable and that the forecast
combination only predicts excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that excess returns are unpredictable
but that the forecast combination predicts the variance of market returns. Scenario 3 implicitly
assumes that excess returns and variance can be predicted by the forecast combination. The
historical mean return and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as
naive benchmarks. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility gains relative to
a strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following
strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized
improvements in Sharpe Ratios achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and
∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively. All data
are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Mean F orecast Combination
∆CER (1) ∆CER (2) ∆CER (3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
γ = 3 1.21 6.07 5.80 0.11 0.50*** 0.50***
γ = 6 0.83 3.76 3.76 0.14 0.55*** 0.60***
γ = 9 0.55 2.52 2.59 0.14 0.54*** 0.62***
γ = 12 0.41 1.89 1.94 0.14 0.54*** 0.62***
Panel B: Median F orecast Combination

.21 6.07 5.80 0.11 0.50*** 0.50***
γ = 6 0.83 3.76 3.76 0.14 0.55*** 0.60***
γ = 9 0.55 2.52 2.59 0.14 0.54*** 0.62***
γ = 12 0.41 1.89 1.94 0.14 0.54*** 0.62***
Panel B: Median F orecast Combination
∆CER (1) ∆CER (2) ∆CER (3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
γ = 3 2.00 6.08 6.22 0.18 0.54*** 0.57***
γ = 6 0.57 3.68 3.85 0.10 0.58*** 0.64***
γ = 9 0.38 2.46 2.62 0.10 0.57*** 0.65***
γ = 12 0.28 1.85 1.96 0.10 0.57*** 0.65***
Panel C: T rimmed Mean F orecast Combination
∆CER (1) ∆CER (2) ∆CER (3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
γ = 3 1.63 6.05 5.94 0.14 0.52*** 0.52***
γ = 6 0.69 3.69 3.80 0.12 0.56*** 0.62***
γ = 9 0.46 2.47 2.56 0.12 0.56*** 0.62***
γ = 12 0.34 1.86 1.92 0.12 0.56*** 0.62***
52

Table XII: Predictability of the Sharpe Ratio
This table reports the regression results of monthly Sharpe Ratios on a constant, which we denote by ϕ0, and the lagged predictive
variable(s). We report the t-statistics in parentheses. Statistical inferences are based on a bootstrapped distribution. A ﬁtted AR(1)
model serves as naive benchmark. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of
Bakshi et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness
of Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM
is the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. R2 and R2
oos are the
in-sample and out-of-sample R2, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels,
respectively. The sample period extends from January 1996 to December 2014. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and
relate to the S&P 500 index.
ϕ0 0.445 0.076 1.381*** 0.650** -0.776 1.092*** 1.005*** 0.669*** 0.040 -0.563 -0.972
(1.53) (0.12) (3.87) (2.46) (-0.80) (4.50) (3.12) (2.74) (0.04) (-0.47) (-0.74)
CRP 5.084** 2.983 2.772 2.829
(2.43) (1.27) (1.18) (1.20)
EXKURT BKM 1.125 0.742 -1.711

** 0.669*** 0.040 -0.563 -0.972
(1.53) (0.12) (3.87) (2.46) (-0.80) (4.50) (3.12) (2.74) (0.04) (-0.47) (-0.74)
CRP 5.084** 2.983 2.772 2.829
(2.43) (1.27) (1.18) (1.20)
EXKURT BKM 1.125 0.742 -1.711
(1.46) (0.84) (-0.73)
FH -1.059 -0.319 -0.344 -0.392
(-1.60) (-0.34) (-0.37) (-0.42)
GMR 0.030* 0.032 0.030 0.029
(1.77) (1.17) (1.08) (1.07)
SKEW BKM -1.958* -1.424 -3.556
(-1.79) (-1.20) (-1.12)
SMIRK -1.262 -1.708* -1.781* -1.846*
(-1.48) (-1.81) (-1.88) (-1.94)
VAR BKM -1.710 -0.268 -0.609 -3.091
(-0.34) (-0.04) (-0.10) (-0.44)
VRP 16.265** 8.439 8.703 8.198
(2.17) (1.00) (1.03) (0.97)
R2 2.56** 0.94 1.13 1.38* 1.40* 0.97 0.05 2.04** 3.30* 3.63** 3.42*
R2
oos 2.99** -0.50 -0.11 -1.84 0.96 0.24 -0.45 1.54* -14.01 -12.82 -14.81
53

Predicting the Equity Market with Option-Implied
Variables
Fabian Hollstein†, Marcel Prokopczuk †,‡, Bj¨ orn Tharann†, and Chardin
Wese Simen‡
Online Appendix
JEL classiﬁcation: G10, G11, G17
Keywords: Equity Premium, Option-Implied Information, Portfolio Choice,
aaaaaaaaaiaaaPredictability, Timing Strategies
†School of Economics and Management, Leibniz University Hannover, Koenigsworther Platz 1, 30167
Hannover, Germany.
‡ICMA Centre, Henley Business School, University of Reading, Reading, RG6 6BA, UK.

Table A1: Economic Value with Turnover and Transaction Costs
This table reports the turnover, the utility gains, and the Sharpe Ratios for each of the three
scenarios. Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is unpredictable and that the forecasting
variable [name in column] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess
returns are unpredictable but that the variable [name in column] and the lagged realized variance
predict the realized variance. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and the realized
variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in column], and in the latter case, by
the forecasting variable [name in column] and the lagged realized variance. The historical mean
return, and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks.
Turnover abs is the monthly absolute value of the turnover for the naive strategy. Turnover (i)
rel
represents the monthly relative turnover of strategy i related to the benchmark. ∆CER (1),
∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility gains relative to a strategy that assumes
unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe
Ratios achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance
at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively.

e annualized improvements in Sharpe
Ratios achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance
at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively. All data are sampled at the monthly
frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ = 3
CRP EXKURT BKM FH GMR SKEW BKM SMIRK VARBKM VRP
Turnoverabs 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448 0.0448
Turnover(1)
rel 12.1906 5.4513 4.5365 3.0830 5.5545 8.9341 2.2193 9.6821
Turnover(2)
rel 4.8831 5.5580 1.2842 2.0465 2.9157 2.7424 2.7127 3.9283
Turnover(3)
rel 14.6331 8.2202 4.1985 2.0576 6.6146 10.9321 3.4473 11.5826
∆CER(1) 2.48 4.19 1.03 -4.31 0.64 0.85 -7.62 -8.46
∆CER(2) -1.03 1.60 1.43 4.39 1.81 1.87 5.94 7.04
∆CER(3) 1.38 4.46 3.17 2.36 2.33 0.55 -4.91 -5.47
∆SR(1) 0.21 0.39** 0.12 -0.14 0.06 0.05 -0.43*** -0.57***
∆SR(2) 0.06 0.20 0.12* 0.24*** 0.21 0.21** 0.36*** 0.47***
∆SR(3) 0.13 0.36* 0.26** 0.22* 0.20 0.06 -0.22 -0.25
Panel B:γ = 6
CRP EXKURT BKM FH GMR SKEW BKM SMIRK VARBKM VRP
Turnoverabs 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247 0.0247
Turnover(1)
rel 15.9051 7.0084 5.7696 5.5303 7.0350 9.3238 4.2300 12.5610
Turnover(2)
rel 10.6311 10.8603 2.2327 2.5870 6.8986 4.7041 5.8114 9.8254
Turnover(3)
rel 25.8225 16.2198 8.4137 5.2987 13.7024 18.2632 5.2006 18.7912
∆CER(1) 0.88 3.03 -0.79 -9.52 0.30 0.85 -11.25 -10.32
∆CER(2) -5.70 0.95 -1.58 2.76 0.29 0.26 4.83 4.18
∆CER(3) -1.36 2.62 -0.68 -3.30 0.64 -0.28 -6.18 -10.91

37 5.2987 13.7024 18.2632 5.2006 18.7912
∆CER(1) 0.88 3.03 -0.79 -9.52 0.30 0.85 -11.25 -10.32
∆CER(2) -5.70 0.95 -1.58 2.76 0.29 0.26 4.83 4.18
∆CER(3) -1.36 2.62 -0.68 -3.30 0.64 -0.28 -6.18 -10.91
∆SR(1) 0.18 0.49*** 0.07 -0.38*** 0.10 0.10 -0.61*** -0.73***
∆SR(2) -0.14 0.25 0.02 0.21*** 0.20* 0.16 0.44*** 0.49***
∆SR(3) 0.12 0.41* 0.22 0.08 0.27 0.06 -0.28 -0.54**
1

Table A1: Economic Value with Turnover and Transaction Costs
(continued)
Panel C:γ = 9
CRP EXKURT BKM FH GMR SKEW BKM SMIRK VARBKM VRP
Turnoverabs 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151 0.0151
Turnover(1)
rel 18.4886 8.8266 7.1716 6.7321 9.2375 10.2124 5.7328 15.0938
Turnover(2)
rel 15.6516 16.8364 3.4586 2.6537 10.1848 5.1486 6.6592 17.8674
Turnover(3)
rel 36.6566 26.1824 11.1854 7.8807 20.6825 24.7431 5.7841 22.0822
∆CER(1) 0.15 2.11 -0.62 -7.43 -0.18 0.57 -10.81 -9.58
∆CER(2) -6.59 0.70 -2.11 1.82 0.03 0.13 3.25 2.20
∆CER(3) -2.17 1.01 -3.55 -4.35 -1.03 -0.41 -4.53 -9.70
∆SR(1) 0.13 0.50*** 0.08 -0.40*** 0.07 0.10 -0.65*** -0.74***
∆SR(2) -0.18 0.25* -0.01 0.18*** 0.18* 0.14 0.44*** 0.49***
∆SR(3) 0.14 0.39 0.07 -0.01 0.22 0.10 -0.29 -0.59***
Panel D:γ = 12
CRP EXKURT BKM FH GMR SKEW BKM SMIRK VARBKM VRP
Turnoverabs 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108 0.0108
Turnover(1)
rel 19.5157 9.1852 7.4131 7.4079 10.0488 10.6805 6.4946 15.8094
Turnover(2)
rel 18.2998 21.0369 4.5438 2.6821 12.2949 5.3345 6.8723 24.3221
Turnover(3)
rel 45.3856 34.0648 12.6527 9.0251 25.9198 27.6275 6.0582 23.5223
∆CER(1) 0.07 1.58 -0.49 -6.05 -0.17 0.43 -8.86 -7.25
∆CER(2) -7.04 0.49 -2.40 1.36 -0.24 0.08 2.43 0.77
∆CER(3) -2.90 0.09 -4.75 -3.49 -1.78 -0.48 -3.45 -8.30
∆SR(1) 0.12 0.50*** 0.08 -0.41*** 0.07 0.10 -0.65*** -0.75***
∆SR(2) -0.21 0.25* -0.04 0.18*** 0.14 0.13 0.44*** 0.43**
∆SR(3) 0.11 0.38 -0.01 -0.01 0.21 0.09 -0.29 -0.59***
2

Table A2: Out-of-Sample Analysis: Restriction – Frequencies
This table reports the absolute frequency of how often the economically motivated restrictions
imposed are binding in the out-of-sample analysis, shown in Table VI. Panel A shows the frequency
for each individual variable, predicting the next month’s excess return. Panel B shows the frequency
for each individual variable as well as lagged realized variance, predicting the next month’s realized
variance. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis
of Bakshi et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is
the generalized measure of riskiness of Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness
of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM is the risk-neutral variance of
Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence
between the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the
realized variance. The historical mean return, and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized
variance serve as naive benchmarks. “(I)” denotes the imposition of the ﬁrst restriction, where we
set the slope estimate in the out-of-sample analysis equal to zero, whenever its sign diﬀers from
that of the in-sample analysis. “(II)” denotes the imposition of the second restriction, where we
set the forecast equal to zero, whenever it is negative.

equal to zero, whenever its sign diﬀers from
that of the in-sample analysis. “(II)” denotes the imposition of the second restriction, where we
set the forecast equal to zero, whenever it is negative. “(I+II)” denotes the joint imposition of both
restrictions. “(I+II) (I)” (“(I+II) (II)”) refers to the frequency of the ﬁrst (second) restriction in
the case of the joint imposition of both restrictions. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency
and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Return Predictability
CRP
EXKURT BKM
FH
GMR
SKEW BKM
SMIRK
VAR BKM
VRP
(I) 0 0 12 8 0 0 35 0
(II) 53 32 8 7 29 62 56 77
(I+II) (I) 0 0 12 8 0 0 35 0
(I+II) (II) 53 32 9 0 29 62 50 77
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
CRP
EXKURT BKM
FH
GMR
SKEW BKM
SMIRK
VAR BKM
VRP
(I) 75 0 76 3 0 0 0 0
(II) 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
(I+II) (I) 75 0 76 3 0 0 0 0
(I+II) (II) 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lagged Realized Variance
(I) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
(II) - - - - - - - -
(I+II) (I) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
(I+II) (II) - - - - - - - -
3

Table A3: Return and Variance Predictability of VRP Speciﬁcations
Panel A of this table reports the regression results of monthly excess returns on a constant, which
we denote by β0, and the lagged predictive variable. Panel B reports the regression results of
monthly realized variance on a constant, which we denote by γ0, the lagged predictive variable,
and the lagged realized variance. Statistical inferences are based on a bootstrapped distribution.
The historical mean return, and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve
as naive benchmarks. VRP HAR denotes the variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model.
VRP DOW N is the downside variance risk premium. VRP U P is the upside variance risk premium.
VRP DOW N,HAR is the downside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. Finally,
VRP U P,HAR is the upside variance risk premium based on the HAR–RV model. R2 and R2
oos are
the in-sample and out-of-sample R2, respectively. We report the t-statistics in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗,
and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively. The
sample period extends from January 1996 to December 2014. All data are sampled at the monthly
frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A: Return Predictability
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
R2 0.00 2.23** 2.65** 0.38 2.05**
R2
oos -5.37 -1.13 -2.38 -4.10 -1.25
t−stat (0.10) (2.26) (2.47) (0.93) (2.17)
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N

VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
R2 0.00 2.23** 2.65** 0.38 2.05**
R2
oos -5.37 -1.13 -2.38 -4.10 -1.25
t−stat (0.10) (2.26) (2.47) (0.93) (2.17)
Panel B: V ariance Predictability
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
R2 42.95 41.03 40.34 41.19 43.94
R2
oos 3.40*** 4.34*** -3.46 -4.05 4.63***
t−stat (3.32) (1.85) (0.89) (2.01) (3.90)
4

Table A4: Economic Value of VRP Speciﬁcations
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios. Scenario
1 assumes that the realized variance is unpredictable and that the forecasting variable [name
in column] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess returns are
unpredictable but that the variable [name in column] and the lagged realized variance predict
the realized variance. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the excess returns and the realized
variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in column], and in the latter case,
by the forecasting variable [name in column] and the lagged realized variance. The historical mean
return, and the forecast of a ﬁtted AR(1) model for realized variance serve as naive benchmarks.
∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility gains relative to a strategy that
assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2,
and 3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in
Sharpe Ratios achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the
signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively. All data are sampled at the
monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ = 3
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
∆CER(1) -7.41 0.24 2.25 -9.33 -9.25
∆CER(2) 6.29 7.40 6.73 5.17 5.11

ampled at the
monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ = 3
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
∆CER(1) -7.41 0.24 2.25 -9.33 -9.25
∆CER(2) 6.29 7.40 6.73 5.17 5.11
∆CER(3) -4.36 6.31 6.74 -4.99 -8.24
∆SR(1) -0.43*** 0.04 0.19** -0.55*** -0.58***
∆SR(2) 0.38*** 0.69*** 0.71*** 0.37*** 0.40***
∆SR(3) -0.20 0.59*** 0.71*** -0.29* -0.51**
Panel B:γ = 6
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
∆CER(1) -10.71 -1.91 0.96 -11.09 -10.73
∆CER(2) 5.47 5.94 5.12 3.70 4.81
∆CER(3) -6.36 4.47 6.13 -6.32 -8.17
∆SR(1) -0.60*** -0.12 0.17* -0.64*** -0.69***
∆SR(2) 0.46*** 0.74*** 0.60*** 0.40*** 0.62***
∆SR(3) -0.27 0.61** 0.79*** -0.37** -0.59***
5

Table A4: Economic Value of VRP Speciﬁcations (continued)
Panel C:γ = 9
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
∆CER(1) -10.65 -2.43 0.63 -10.89 -9.83
∆CER(2) 3.72 4.24 3.21 2.49 4.36
∆CER(3) -4.72 3.39 4.63 -5.68 -6.97
∆SR(1) -0.62*** -0.21 0.17* -0.65*** -0.73***
∆SR(2) 0.47*** 0.67*** 0.45** 0.36*** 0.76***
∆SR(3) -0.29 0.64** 0.80*** -0.40** -0.60***
Panel D:γ = 12
VRP HAR
VRP DOW N
VRP U P
VRP DOW N,HAR
VRP U P,HAR
∆CER(1) -8.65 -2.20 0.47 -10.35 -7.82
∆CER(2) 2.78 3.15 2.25 1.85 3.43
∆CER(3) -3.60 2.53 3.25 -4.61 -5.49
∆SR(1) -0.63*** -0.23* 0.17* -0.62*** -0.72***
∆SR(2) 0.47*** 0.61*** 0.43* 0.34*** 0.80***
∆SR(3) -0.29 0.65** 0.76** -0.40** -0.59***
6

Table A5: Variance Predictability: Alternative Approach
This table reports the regression results of monthly realized variance on a constant, which we denote by γ0, and the lagged predictive
variable(s). We report the t-statistics in parentheses. Statistical inferences are based on a bootstrapped distribution. The historical
mean serves as naive benchmark. CRP denotes the correlation risk premium. EXKURT BKM is the risk-neutral kurtosis of Bakshi
et al. (2003). FH is the risk-neutral riskiness measure of Leiss & Nax (2018). GMR is the generalized measure of riskiness of
Bali et al. (2011). SKEW BKM is the risk-neutral skewness of Bakshi et al. (2003). SMIRK is the option smirk. VAR BKM is
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003). Finally, VRP is the variance risk premium computed as the diﬀerence between
the risk-neutral variance of Bakshi et al. (2003) and the most recent observation of the realized variance. R2 and R2
oos are the
in-sample and out-of-sample R2, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels,
respectively. The sample period extends from January 1996 to December 2014. All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and
relate to the S&P 500 index.
γ0
0.043*** 0.074*** 0.036*** 0.025*** 0.073*** 0.022*** -0.004 0.038*** 0.021* 0.025* 0.025
(9.49) (7.84) (6.28) (5.87) (4.71) (6.09) (-1.00) (9.88) (1.84) (1.75) (1.56)
CRP -0.123*** -0.074*** -0.073*** -0.073***
(-3.72) (-2.61) (-2.59) (-2.58)

0.022*** -0.004 0.038*** 0.021* 0.025* 0.025
(9.49) (7.84) (6.28) (5.87) (4.71) (6.09) (-1.00) (9.88) (1.84) (1.75) (1.56)
CRP -0.123*** -0.074*** -0.073*** -0.073***
(-3.72) (-2.61) (-2.59) (-2.58)
EXKURTBKM -0.057*** -0.010 -0.001
(-4.78) (-0.91) (-0.05)
FH -0.010 -0.012 -0.011 -0.011
(-0.93) (-1.04) (-1.02) (-1.02)
GMR 0.001*** -0.001* -0.001* -0.001*
(2.98) (-1.69) (-1.66) (-1.65)
SKEWBKM 0.047*** 0.014 0.012
(2.72) (0.96) (0.32)
SMIRK 0.071*** 0.030*** 0.030*** 0.030***
(5.53) (2.62) (2.66) (2.64)
VARBKM 0.756*** 0.720*** 0.731*** 0.729***
(11.95) (9.15) (9.94) (8.63)
VRP -0.399*** -0.209** -0.208** -0.208**
(-3.36) (-2.06) (-2.05) (-2.05)
R2 5.80*** 9.24*** 0.38 3.79*** 3.19*** 11.97*** 38.83*** 4.79*** 45.69*** 45.71*** 45.47***
R2
oos 1.88*** 8.04*** -0.75 -7.12 2.65*** 8.61*** 34.65*** -2.92 5.18*** 4.25*** 0.55***
7

Table A6: Economic Value: Alternative Approach
This table reports utility gains and Sharpe Ratios for each of the three scenarios. Scenario 1 assumes that the realized variance is
unpredictable and that the forecasting variable [name in row] only predicts the excess returns. Scenario 2 assumes that the excess
returns are unpredictable but that the variable [name in row] predicts the realized variance. Scenario 3 implicitly assumes that the
excess returns and the realized variance can be predicted by the forecasting variable [name in row]. The historical mean serves as
naive benchmark for both return and variance predictability. ∆CER (1), ∆CER (2), and ∆CER (3) are the annualized utility gains
relative to a naive strategy that assumes unpredictable excess returns and realized variance, achieved by following strategy 1, 2, and
3, respectively. Similarly, ∆SR(1), ∆SR(2), and ∆SR(3) are the annualized improvements in Sharpe Ratios achieved by following
strategy 1, 2, and 3, respectively. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate the signiﬁcance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % signiﬁcance levels, respectively.
All data are sampled at the monthly frequency and relate to the S&P 500 index.
Panel A:γ=3
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 5.46 1.63 4.63 0.46** 0.11 0.40*
EXKURTBKM 5.39 3.69 6.24 0.51*** 0.34*** 0.58***
FH 1.99 0.01 1.30 0.18 -0.04 0.12
GMR -3.77 2.46 -0.96 -0.12 0.13*** -0.05
SKEWBKM 1.86 1.78 3.28 0.16 0.13** 0.29
SMIRK 2.96 1.47 2.91 0.30 0.14 0.30

EXKURTBKM 5.39 3.69 6.24 0.51*** 0.34*** 0.58***
FH 1.99 0.01 1.30 0.18 -0.04 0.12
GMR -3.77 2.46 -0.96 -0.12 0.13*** -0.05
SKEWBKM 1.86 1.78 3.28 0.16 0.13** 0.29
SMIRK 2.96 1.47 2.91 0.30 0.14 0.30
VARBKM -7.28 7.19 -1.65 -0.42*** 0.50*** -0.09
VRP -6.10 -1.57 -5.43 -0.41* -0.13 -0.41*
Panel B:γ=6
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 3.05 1.50 2.86 0.45** 0.14* 0.43*
EXKURTBKM 3.92 3.05 4.83 0.63*** 0.40*** 0.70***
FH -0.05 0.36 -0.35 0.13 -0.01 0.03
GMR -8.82 1.62 -1.35 -0.35** 0.13*** -0.10
SKEWBKM 1.20 1.30 2.36 0.22 0.14** 0.37**
SMIRK 2.07 1.10 2.13 0.38* 0.14 0.37*
VARBKM -10.70 5.67 -0.45 -0.60*** 0.71*** 0.02
VRP -8.49 -0.98 -6.14 -0.60*** -0.12 -0.53**
Panel C:γ=9
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.71 1.04 1.56 0.40* 0.12* 0.38
EXKURTBKM 2.82 2.27 3.74 0.67*** 0.40*** 0.74***
FH -0.03 0.26 -0.20 0.16 -0.02 0.07
GMR -6.87 1.10 -0.93 -0.36** 0.13*** -0.10
SKEWBKM 0.58 0.88 1.76 0.20 0.13** 0.41**
SMIRK 1.40 0.75 1.47 0.38* 0.14 0.38*
VARBKM -10.28 3.94 -0.18 -0.63*** 0.73*** 0.05
VRP -8.15 -0.65 -6.22 -0.63*** -0.10 -0.58**
Panel D:γ=12
∆CER(1) ∆CER(2) ∆CER(3) ∆SR(1) ∆SR(2) ∆SR(3)
CRP 1.25 0.78 0.87 0.40* 0.10* 0.36
EXKURTBKM 2.11 1.80 2.93 0.67*** 0.40*** 0.74***
FH -0.05 0.20 -0.19 0.16 -0.02 0.08
GMR -5.59 0.83 -0.71 -0.37** 0.13*** -0.10
SKEWBKM 0.44 0.66 1.35 0.20 0.13** 0.42**
SMIRK 1.05 0.57 1.10 0.38* 0.14 0.38*
VARBKM -8.37 2.95 -0.15 -0.63*** 0.73*** 0.05
VRP -6.18 -0.49 -5.82 -0.63*** -0.10 -0.59**
8
