TSpace Research Repository tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Time-Varying Crash Risk Embedded in 
Index Options: The Role of Stock Market 
Liquidity 
 
Peter Christoffersen, Bruno Feunou, Yoontae Jeon & Chayawat 
Ornthanalai 
 
Version Accepted Manuscript 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Christoffersen, P., Feunou, B., Jeon, Y., & Ornthanalai, C. (2021). 
Time-varying crash risk embedded in index options: The role of stock 
market liquidity. Review of Finance, 25(4), 1261-1298. 
 
 
 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfaa040 
 
 
 
Publisher’s Statement This article has been accepted for publication in the Review of Finance. 
Published by Oxford University Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters.

Time-Varying Crash Risk Embedded in Index Options:
The Role of Stock Market Liquidity *
Peter Christoﬀersen Bruno Feunou Yoontae Jeon
Chayawat Ornthanalai
Abstract
We estimate a continuous-time model with dynamic crash probability using the S&P500
index options and high-frequency information. We ﬁnd that market illiquidity is an im-
portant factor in explaining the time-varying stock market crash risk embedded in index
options. While market illiquidity and return volatility play complementary roles in ex-
plaining the time-varying crash risk, the relative contribution of the volatility factor is
weakened once we include market illiquidity as an economic variable. Examining the link
between market illiquidity and option-implied crash risk, we ﬁnd that the availability of
arbitrage capital and adverse selection facing liquidity providers are economic driving
forces.
JEL Classiﬁcation: G01, G12
Keywords: Market liquidity; Crash risk; Jump intensity; Options; Filtering
* For helpful comments, we thank Torben Andersen, Sabrina Buti, Liya Chu, Genevi` eve Gauthier, Can-
lin Li, Tom McCurdy, Andreas Park, Ishita Sen, Fabio Trojani, Miaomiao Yu, and Irina Zviadadze. This
paper has beneﬁted from comments by conference and seminar participants at the AFA, Bank of Canada,
CICF, ESSEC, IFSID, LBS Trans-Atlantic Doctoral Conference, NFA, NUS Risk Management Conference,
NYU Volatility & Derivatives Conference, SOFIE Conference, Rotman School of Management, Santiago Fi-

,
CICF, ESSEC, IFSID, LBS Trans-Atlantic Doctoral Conference, NFA, NUS Risk Management Conference,
NYU Volatility & Derivatives Conference, SOFIE Conference, Rotman School of Management, Santiago Fi-
nance Workshop, and University of Geneva. We would like to thank the Bank of Canada, the Global Risk
Institute (GRI), the Montreal Institute of Structured Finance and Derivatives (IFSID), and the Social Sci-
ences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) for ﬁnancial support. Peter Christoﬀersen and Chayawat
Ornthanalai are aﬃliated with the Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George
Street, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 3E6. Bruno Feunou is aﬃliated with the Bank of Canada, 234 Welling-
ton Street, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0G9. Yoontae Jeon is aﬃliated with the Ted Rogers School of Management,
Ryerson University, 55 Dundas Street West, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5G 2C3. Feunou can be reached at
feun@bankofcanada.ca. Jeon can be reached at yoontae.jeon@ryerson.ca. Ornthanalai can be reached
at chay.ornthanalai@rotman.utoronto.ca. We are responsible for any inadequacies. Please send your
correspondence to Chayawat Ornthanalai.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

1 Introduction
Market liquidity, deﬁned as the ease with which securities can be bought or sold without
signiﬁcant price impact, has become an increasing concern in ﬁnancial markets. 1 We ask:
What is the impact of market liquidity on the volatility and crash probability of the aggregate
stock market? To answer this question, we estimate a continuous-time model with stochastic
volatility and dynamic crash probability. The innovation of our model is the introduction of
market illiquidity as an economic factor driving the dynamics of volatility and jump intensity.
We measure daily market illiquidity (i.e., lack of market liquidity) as the average eﬀective
bid-ask spreads of securities constituting the S&P500 index estimated from high-frequency
trades. This measure is motivated by Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009) and can be
thought of as the average cost of a round-trip trade for stocks in the index. We estimate
the model during 2003–2016 using daily S&P500 index options, realized spot variance, and
market illiquidity, and ﬁnd that three-quarter of the time-varying crash probability is related
to the stock market’s exposure to market illiquidity.
While there exists some empirical evidence suggesting that crashes in the stock market are
often driven by market illiquidity, they are typically anecdotal (e.g., “ﬂash crash”) or limited
to individual stocks.2 This calls into question the economic role of stock market liquidity in the
dynamic of aggregate stock market.

dity, they are typically anecdotal (e.g., “ﬂash crash”) or limited
to individual stocks.2 This calls into question the economic role of stock market liquidity in the
dynamic of aggregate stock market. In relation to this, there is an extensive literature on index
return models which unanimously agrees that index prices “jump,” where crashes are referred
to as large negative jumps in index returns that cannot be explained by the current level of
index return volatility.3 Several studies have advocated that the probability of crashes is time-
varying and model their arrival rate using as a latent state variable.The common approach is
to let the jump arrival rate increase with the level of the stock return variance. Although this
1Chung and Chuwonganant (2014) ﬁnd that regulatory changes in the US market have increased the role of
non-bank traders in liquidity provision, intensifying the relationship between volatility and market liquidity.
2Jiang and Yao (2013) ﬁnd that illiquid stocks have higher daily jump returns in the cross-section, and
Brogaard, Li, and Xia (2016) show that enhanced stock liquidity decreases the ﬁrm’s default risk.
3For instance, Pan (2002), Maheu and McCurdy (2004), Bates (2006), and Bakshi, Carr, and Wu (2008).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

modeling approach is parsimonious, it is at odds with the notion that crashes are sudden price
drops unexplainable by the current volatility level. 4 Importantly, while recent studies agree
that crash risk is time-varying, they are less explicit on the economic variables driving its
dynamic. Our study contributes by providing economic underpinnings to models with time-
varying crash risk, and showing that much of the variation in jump intensity can be explained
by market trading frictions.
To motivate our subsequent modeling framework, we apply a predictive regression analysis
linking our market illiquidity measure to a risk-neutral skewness estimated non-parametrically
from index option prices. A more negative risk-neutral skewness would imply that the market
expects a higher probability of large negative returns. We ﬁnd that the risk-neutral skew-
ness signiﬁcantly becomes more negative with an increase in the level of market illiquidity.
Importantly, the eﬀect of market illiquidity crowds out the eﬀect of realized diﬀusive vari-
ance estimated non-parametrically from intraday index returns, suggesting that stock market
illiquidity is the more robust variable that explains the crash probability embedded in the
index option prices. We conﬁrm this ﬁnding by running similar daily time-series regressions
on realized skewness and realized jump variation measures estimated from intra-day returns.

embedded in the
index option prices. We conﬁrm this ﬁnding by running similar daily time-series regressions
on realized skewness and realized jump variation measures estimated from intra-day returns.
In either case, we obtain similar conclusions conﬁrming the robust linkage between market
illiquidity and crash risk.
Armed with the evidence above, we estimate a continuous-time model similar to the
stochastic volatility with jump model (SVJ) studied by Pan (2002) and Bates (2006), among
others. In this model, the jump arrival rate is aﬃne in return variance. We extend this frame-
work by letting the time-varying jump intensity dynamic be a function of return variance,
market illiquidity, and a latent state variable. We estimate the model by extracting informa-
tion embedded in index options and high-frequency intraday trades. We use the unscented
4Santa-Clara and Yan (2010) is a notable exception, as they model the jump intensity as a quadratic
function of state variables. In an aﬃne framework, Andersen, Benzoni, and Lund (2002) and Andersen,
Fusari, and Todorov (2016) ﬁnd a statistically weak relationship between crash intensity and spot variance.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Kalman ﬁlter (UKF) to extract daily state variables. This ﬁltering method allows for sequen-
tial learning in the dynamics of latent jump intensity, variance, and illiquidity processes.
We refer to the most general model that we study as the stochastic jump with variance
and illiquidity (SJVI). In this model, the jump intensity dynamic is stochastic and aﬃne in
the spot variance, the market illiquidity level, and the latent jump-intensity-speciﬁc variable
designed to capture the omitted risk factor. For comparisons, we estimate two other bench-
mark models with jump intensity dynamics that are unrelated to the market illiquidity level.
In all speciﬁcations, we jointly model the spot variance and the market illiquidity as a two-
factor square-root process. This allows for market illiquidity to impact the spot variance, and
vice versa. Our estimation results show a strong contemporaneous relationship between the
spot variance and market illiquidity, which lends support to previous studies that have doc-
umented a positive relationship between return volatility and trading activity (e.g., Schwert,
1989; Lamoureux and Lastrapes, 1990; Chae, 2005).
We ﬁnd that the average jump probability is between 1 and 2.5 per year. When a jump
occurs, its average size is between−3.1% and−5.4% in daily return units. We ﬁnd strong evi-
dence that during our sample period, crash risk in the S&P500 index mostly reﬂects investors’
fear of market illiquidity.

verage size is between−3.1% and−5.4% in daily return units. We ﬁnd strong evi-
dence that during our sample period, crash risk in the S&P500 index mostly reﬂects investors’
fear of market illiquidity. We arrive at this conclusion by examining the contribution of mar-
ket illiquidity to the jump intensity dynamic in the new model and ﬁnd a contemporaneous
positive relationship with a strong statistical signiﬁcance. On the other hand, the contribu-
tion of spot variance is modest and substantially decreases when we add market illiquidity as
an economic covariate in the jump intensity dynamic. This ﬁnding supports our preliminary
evidence found using regression analysis.
The relative importance of market illiquidity and market volatility varies across times. We
ﬁnd that shocks to stock market illiquidity are related to crashes that appear during normal
times, i.e., “out-of-the-blue,” while shocks to the volatility factor are related to crashes that
appear during business-cycle downturns. In terms of economic magnitudes, we ﬁnd that
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

market illiquidity explains about three-quarter of the S&P500 index’s crash probability level
during our sample (77% on average). On the contrary, the contribution of market spot variance
to the jump intensity dynamic is only about 13%, with the remaining 10% coming from the
latent jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor. However, during the 12-month period after the Lehman
Brothers’ collapse in 2008, the market spot variance dominates other factors in explaining the
time-varying crash probability, with the contribution as high as 70%. We arrive at a similar
result when looking at how much of the unexpected daily changes in jump intensity can be
explained by shocks to the market illiquidity and the market spot variance.
Our results raise important questions regarding the strong connection between market
illiquidity and time-varying crash risk embedded in index options: What are the economic
forces leading to the lack of market liquidity which we measure using the aggregate bid-ask
spread of the stock market? Relatedly, how are these economic drivers related to the time-
varying crash risk that we infer from index options prices? To answer these questions, we
draw on intuition from market microstructure theories and examine variables that have been
shown to signiﬁcantly aﬀect security bid-ask spreads.
We use a vector autoregressive (VAR) model to identify the economic drivers that pre-
dict market illiquidity. This approach helps control for endogenous lead-lag eﬀects between

rity bid-ask spreads.
We use a vector autoregressive (VAR) model to identify the economic drivers that pre-
dict market illiquidity. This approach helps control for endogenous lead-lag eﬀects between
potential explanatory variables. We ﬁnd that two variables stand out. The ﬁrst is the noise
measure of Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013), which is calculated based on errors from ﬁtting U.S.
Treasury yield curves. This variable is linked to the amount of arbitrage capital available in
the ﬁnancial markets, which aﬀects the cost of liquidity provisions (Brunnermeier and Peder-
sen, 2009). The U.S. Treasury market is centrally important to all investors, and intuitively,
the shortage of arbitrage capital would lead Treasury yields to deviate more freely from the
curve, resulting in more noise in prices.
The abnormal order ﬂow observed in the S&P500 E-mini futures contract is the second
variable that strongly predicts the level of market illiquidity. The E-mini futures market is
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

highly liquid and trades nearly around the clock, enabling it to serve as a competitive venue for
investors, speculators, and market makers to trade their exposures to the stock market index.
An imbalance in either direction of trade could alarm liquidity providers that the market is
dominated by informed traders. 5 As a result, adverse selection arises as the primary concern
of liquidity providers thereby pressuring them to aggressively widen their quotes (Glosten and
Milgrom, 1985).
We show that daily changes in the above two economic variables: the noise measure of
Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013), and the abnormal order ﬂow in the E-mini futures contract,
negatively aﬀect the risk-neutral skewness implied by index options prices. For the noise
measure, our ﬁnding suggests that when liquidity providers face funding constraints, they
are less willing to deploy arbitrage capital to help keep the relative price of out-of-the-money
(OTM) put options in line with fundamentals. This makes the price of OTM put options
relatively more expensive resulting in a more negative option-implied risk-neutral skewness
which signals a higher probability of crash risk. As for the adverse selection cost, we ﬁnd that
only the change in sell order ﬂows (i.e., more excessive selling) in the E-mini futures contract
negatively aﬀects option-implied risk-neutral skewness. This ﬁnding indicates that excessive
sell order ﬂows raise liquidity providers’ concern that they are trading against investors with

s contract
negatively aﬀects option-implied risk-neutral skewness. This ﬁnding indicates that excessive
sell order ﬂows raise liquidity providers’ concern that they are trading against investors with
informed negative information about the stock market. In response, liquidity providers raise
their OTM put option quotes in order the reﬂect the cost of providing insurance against a
potential drop in the index level, leading to a more negative risk-neutral skewness implied by
index options.
We verify that our main conclusions hold using various robustness checks. For instance,
we re-estimate our models using alternative market illiquidity measures including Amihud
(2002), and the relative eﬀective spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures contract and reach the
same conclusion.
5As discussed in the CFTC-SEC Report (2010), the ﬂash crash on May 6, 2010 is widely believed to have
been precipitated by a large sell order in the E-mini contract.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and sample
selection, and reports preliminary evidence found using regression analyses. Section 3 describes
the model and estimation procedure. Section 4 discusses estimation results and interpretation
of our ﬁndings. Section 5 discusses the economic connection between market illiquidity and
crash risk. Finally, Section 6 concludes.
2 Data and Preliminary Evidence
Our sample period goes from January 1, 2003 through April 26, 2016. The decimalization of
trading at the NYSE began in 2001, which caused a structural shift in stock bid-ask spreads.
We start our sample in 2003 to allow this regulation change to take full eﬀect.
2.1 Market Illiquidity
We construct a time-series measure of market illiquidity at the daily level. We focus on the
trading friction associated with the cost of participating in the stock market. We measure
this using eﬀective bid-ask spreads following Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009), who ﬁnd
strong empirical support for using eﬀective bid-ask spreads as a measure of market illiquidity.
We obtain all transactions recorded on securities constituting the S&P500 index from the
TAQ database. Then, for each stock i on day t, we calculate the eﬀective spread of its kth
trade as
ILQi
t,k = 2|Si,P
t,k−Si,M
t,k|
Si,M
t,k
, (1)
where Si,P
t,k is the price of the kth trade of stock i on day t, and Si,M
t,k is the midpoint of the
best prevailing bid and ask at the time of the kth trade.

,k = 2|Si,P
t,k−Si,M
t,k|
Si,M
t,k
, (1)
where Si,P
t,k is the price of the kth trade of stock i on day t, and Si,M
t,k is the midpoint of the
best prevailing bid and ask at the time of the kth trade. The daily eﬀective spread of stock
i on day t is then computed as the dollar-volume weighted average eﬀective spread across all
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

trades during the day 6
ILQi
t =
∑K
k=1DolVol i
t,kILQi
t,k
∑K
k=1DolVol i
t,k
. (2)
Lastly, the daily stock market illiquidity measure is the equal-weighted average of the daily
eﬀective spreads of ﬁrms constituting the S&P500 index: ILQt = 1
N
∑N
i=1ILQi
t. This is
approximately equal to the ﬁrst principal component of a given stock illiquidity panel but
avoids principal component complications arising from unbalanced panels when ﬁrms are
added or dropped from the S&P500 index. As a robustness check, we also veriﬁed that our
main results remain virtually similar using the value-weighted average.
Daily S&P500 cash index returns are plotted in the top panel of Figure 1, while the middle
panel plots the daily time series of market illiquidity, ILQ. We plot the market illiquidity
measure by scaling their daily levels by 252, which converts it to annualized terms. The mean
annualized ILQ measure is 15.91% or equivalently 0 .063% at the daily level. This implies
that a strategy that involves daily round-trip trades of S&P500 stocks would lose, on average,
15.91% to bid-ask transaction costs per year. The standard deviation of the annualized market
illiquidity is 5.96% with an interquartile range of 12.36% and 17.48%. We see that the market
illiquidity measure rises signiﬁcantly during the sub-prime crisis period but stays relatively
stable in other periods with occasional spikes.
2.2 Market Illiquidity and Crash Risk

ee that the market
illiquidity measure rises signiﬁcantly during the sub-prime crisis period but stays relatively
stable in other periods with occasional spikes.
2.2 Market Illiquidity and Crash Risk
In this section, we provide evidence linking the role of market illiquidity to crash risk embedded
in index options. If market illiquidity is strongly linked to stock market crash risk, we expect
ILQt to be negatively related to stock market skewness. We follow the nonparametric method
6Figure A.1 in the Appendix shows percentiles of daily dollar eﬀective spread distribution for the S&P500
constituents. For the majority of ﬁrms, their trading cost measured by the dollar eﬀective spread is well above
one cent, which is the minimum tick size set by the exchanges. This ﬁnding suggests that the eﬀective spread
measure that we use is not strongly aﬀected by the minimum tick-size rule.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

developed by Bakshi and Madan (2000) and calculate daily option-implied skewness from S&P
500 index options. We refer to this measure as risk-neutral skewness, RNSkew. We obtained
end-of-day S&P500 index option prices from OptionMetrics.RNSkew is calculated from option
contracts with approximately one month to maturity. Therefore, the measure RNSkewt on
dayt that we use represents a proxy for investors’ forward-looking risk-neutral expectation of
stock market crash risk from the end of dayt to dayt+30. We discuss details on the skewness
measure in Appendix A.
We examine the impact of market illiquidity on risk-neutral stock market skewness using
the following regression model:
∆RNSkewt = β1∆MinRVt +β2∆ILQt +
p∑
i=1
αi∆RNSkewt−i +
q∑
j=1
δjϵt−j +ϵt, (3)
where ∆ indicates that we are examining the change in daily variables, and ϵt is a normally
distributed error term. We estimate the model on changes in daily skewness and not on levels
because RNSkewt is highly persistent with a ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of 0 .98.
Existing models for index options with time-varying jump intensity often assume that the
jump arrival is aﬃne in the diﬀusive variance of index return, which allows for the likelihood
of crashes to increase with the level of stock market volatility. We control for the impact
of diﬀusive variation in daily index returns using MinRV, which is the jump-robust realized
variance measure of Andersen, Dobrev, and Schaumburg (2012). It is calculated using one-

rol for the impact
of diﬀusive variation in daily index returns using MinRV, which is the jump-robust realized
variance measure of Andersen, Dobrev, and Schaumburg (2012). It is calculated using one-
minute intraday S&P500 cash index returns obtained from TickData as follows:
MinRV N
t = π
π− 2( N
N− 1)
N−1∑
i=1
min(|ri,t|,|ri+1,t|)2. (4)
ri,t for i = 1...N = 450 the one-minute intraday return on day t.
The regression shown in equation (3) is an autoregressive-moving-average model (ARMA)
with p-order lags in the autoregressive term and q-order lags in the error term. Although
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

not shown in equation (3), we include daily index returns Return, and day-of-the-week ﬁxed
eﬀects as control variables. We estimate the model using maximum likelihood.
Table 1 reports estimation results for four regression speciﬁcations based on the general
model in equation (3). We choose the ARMA model with p = 2 lags in the autoregressive
term and q = 1 in the error term. The number of lags is determined by the Ljung-Box test
corresponding to the most parsimonious model that suﬃciently removes autocorrelation in
the residuals. Column (1) provides the baseline regression results. It shows that the change
in risk-neutral skewness is negatively related to the index return and is strongly explained by
its autoregressive terms. Columns (2) and (3) show that when ∆MinRV and ∆ILQ are sepa-
rately included in the regression, they load negatively on the change in risk-neutral skewness.
However, ∆ILQ is the only statistically signiﬁcant variable. The negative and highly signif-
icant coeﬃcient on ∆ILQ suggests that when the average trading cost in the stock market
increases, investors’ expectation of market crash risk also increases.
Column 4 reports results for the full regression model. We observe two striking ﬁndings.
First, the coeﬃcient on ∆ MinRV switches sign from negative to positive and is signiﬁcant
at the 10% level. Second, the coeﬃcient on ∆ ILQ remains negative and signiﬁcant but
substantially increases in terms of magnitude.

on ∆ MinRV switches sign from negative to positive and is signiﬁcant
at the 10% level. Second, the coeﬃcient on ∆ ILQ remains negative and signiﬁcant but
substantially increases in terms of magnitude. These results suggest that an increase in ILQ
are robustly related with a higher probability of stock market risk-neutral skewness, i.e., crash
risk. The positive coeﬃcient on ∆MinRV , however, shows that an increasing market variance
is related to a less negatively skewed risk-neutral distribution of daily index returns. As a
robustness check, we verify this result by replacingMinRV with the total quadratic variation
(RV ) calculated as the sum of squared one-minute log returns in Table 1 and obtain the same
conclusion.
While the results in Table 1 is based on the risk-neutral skewness of the stock market
implicit in index options, we reach the same conclusion when using the realized skewness
as well as the realized jump variation constructed from one-minute intraday returns of the
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

S&P500 cash index. To save space, these results are reported in Tables IA.1 and IA.2 of the
Internet Appendix. Motivated by this model-free evidence, we now develop a continuous-time
model that allows market illiquidity to act as an economic covariate in explaining time-varying
volatility and crash risk.
3 Model and Estimation
3.1 The SJVI Model
We begin by specifying the processes governing the log index price, spot variance, spot illiq-
uidity, and the latent component of jump intensity dynamic under the risk-neutral measure
(Q). We use St andVt to denote index price and spot variance at time t. We let Lt represent
the spot market illiquidity, which measures the average cost of trading in the stock market at
timet, with a higher value indicating a more illiquid market. We include a stochastic process
Ψt that is designed to capture the latent time-varying jump intensity in index returns. Thus,
the model consists of four factors that fully describe the return dynamics under Q:
d log(St) = ( r− 1
2Vt−µλt)dt +
√
Vt(
√
1−ρ2dW 1
t +ρdW 2
t ) +qtdNt (5)
[dVt
dLt
]
=
[ 1 αL
αV 1
][
κV (θV−Vt)dt +ξV
√VtdW 2
t
κL(θL−Lt)dt +ξL
√LtdW 3
t
]
(6)
dΨt = κΨ(θΨ− Ψt)dt +ξΨ
√
ΨtdW 4
t, (7)
wherer denotes the risk-free rate and all Brownian motions dWi
t , for i = 1 to 4, are indepen-
dent of each other.
We assume the latent jump intensity process Ψt in equation (7) follows the standard square-
root model with long-run mean levels of θΨ. The dynamics of the variance and illiquidity

ent of each other.
We assume the latent jump intensity process Ψt in equation (7) follows the standard square-
root model with long-run mean levels of θΨ. The dynamics of the variance and illiquidity
factors in equation (6) follow extended bivariate Heston (1993) square-root processes that
each mean-revert to long-term means ofθV andθL. Note that special case where αV =αL = 0
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

corresponds to two independent square-root processes. 7
The log index price dynamic described in equation (5) follows a standard jump-diﬀusion
process where qtdNt denotes the jump component. Following the extant literature on index
return models, we assume that jumps follow a compound Poisson process with intensity λt
and each individual jump is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) normal with the
jump mean size θ and the jump size standard deviation δ. To ensure the discounted stock
price is a martingale, we include the jump compensation term µ = e(θ+δ2
2 )− 1 in equation
(5). Lastly, to complete the model, we specify the dynamic of the time-varying jump intensity
λt as follows:
SJVI model: λt = Ψt +γVVt +γLLt. (8)
This jump intensity speciﬁcation is motivated by numerical tractability and ease of economic
interpretation. Equation (8) shows that the time-varying jump arrival rate is determined
jointly by the levels of spot variance Vt, spot market illiquidity Lt, and state variable Ψ t.
The latent state variable Ψt is designed to capture the portion of jump intensity dynamic not
explained by the covariatesVt andLt. For the remainder of the paper, we refer to this general
speciﬁcation as the SJVI model.
Equation (6) shows that the evolution of the spot variance depends on its own mean-
reverting drift, the diﬀusive component, and the market illiquidity process Lt. This spec-

ation as the SJVI model.
Equation (6) shows that the evolution of the spot variance depends on its own mean-
reverting drift, the diﬀusive component, and the market illiquidity process Lt. This spec-
iﬁcation allows for changes in the market spot variance Vt and market illiquidity Lt to be
contemporaneously related, which is supported by Lamoureux and Lastrapes (1990) who ﬁnd
that daily trading volume signiﬁcantly explains daily return variance.
We also note that the variance dynamic that we consider in equation (6) falls under the
class of two-factor stochastic volatility models, which have been shown to eﬀectively explain
7Our main conclusions are unaﬀected when estimating a simpler model without feedbacks between the spot
variance and spot illiquidity, i.e., αV =αL = 0 in equation (6).
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

the term structure of index option prices. 8 Our model diﬀers from the existing two-factor
volatility literature in that we allow the expected future variance to depend both on the level
of spot variance, Vt, and spot market illiquidity, Lt.
It can be shown that the long-run mean of the spot variance and spot illiquidity are still
given by θV and θL, respectively. Notice that the special case where αL is equal to 0 reduces
to the Heston (1993) model. The current level of market illiquidity aﬀects the shape of the
expected term structure of variance as long as αL is diﬀerent than 0, but its impact dissipates
as the time horizon increases.
3.2 Benchmark Models
We consider two nested speciﬁcations of the SJVI model. In the ﬁrst speciﬁcation, we shut
down the illiquidity channel in the time-varying jump intensity dynamic by setting γL = 0 in
equation (8). As the result, the probability of observing jumps depends on the level of spot
variance and the latent state component as follows:
SJV model: λt = Ψt +γVVt. (9)
We refer to this as the stochastic jump intensity with variance (SJV) model. When Ψ t is
constant, it nests the aﬃne jump intensity dynamic, λt = γ0 +γVVt, commonly adopted in
time-varying jump studies (e.g., Pan, 2002; Bates, 2006).
The second nested speciﬁcation shuts oﬀ the impact of both market illiquidity and the
spot variance on the jump probability. That is, we set γV and γL equal to zero in equation
(8). This yields
SJ model: λt = Ψt, (10)

speciﬁcation shuts oﬀ the impact of both market illiquidity and the
spot variance on the jump probability. That is, we set γV and γL equal to zero in equation
(8). This yields
SJ model: λt = Ψt, (10)
8See for examples, Egloﬀ, Leippold, and Wu (2010), and Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015b).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

We refer to this as the stochastic jump intensity model (SJ). We keep all other aspects of the
three models that we study identical. This allows us to focus solely on the role of market
illiquidity and spot variance in assessing time-varying jump risk.
3.3 Filtering State Variables
Each of the three models we study contains three latent state variables: Vt, Lt, and Ψt. We
extract the latent state variables using the square-root unscented Kalman ﬁlter (UKF) of
Van der Merwe and Wan (2001). We apply the UKF method because the option prices data
that we ﬁt the models to are non-linear in the state variables.
The state variables in the ﬁltering equations evolve under the physical probability ( P)
measure. We therefore need to deﬁne the state variables’ dynamic under the physical measure.
We apply the commonly used functional form of the price of variance risk to the spot variance
process, which is given by νV
√Vt as in Heston (1993). This price of risk speciﬁcation shifts a
Brownian shock in equation (6) by dW 2,P
t =dW 2
t−νV
√Vtdt, where the superscript P denotes
that it is evaluated under the physical probability measure. We do not impose risk premiums
on the Lt and Ψt processes for simplicity and also because the literature has not yet provided
clear guidance on how to model their risk premiums. As a result, there is no change to these
two processes from Q to P.
Applying this transformation, the resulting joint dynamics of variance and illiquidity under
P can be written as

eir risk premiums. As a result, there is no change to these
two processes from Q to P.
Applying this transformation, the resulting joint dynamics of variance and illiquidity under
P can be written as
[dVt
dLt
]
=
[ 1 αL
αV 1
][
κP
V (θP
V−Vt)dt +ξV
√VtdW 2,P
t
κL(θL−Lt)dt +ξL
√LtdW 3
t
]
(11)
where we have the following parameter mappings κP
V =κV−νVξV and θP
V =θVκV/κP
V .
We discretize the P-measure state dynamics using the conventional Euler scheme at the
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

daily interval. The discretized state-space system can be written as follows:
Vt+1 = Vt +κP
V (θP
V−Vt)∆t +αLκL(θL−Lt)∆t +ξV
√
∆tVtϵ1
t+1 +αLξL
√
∆tLtϵ2
t+1 (12)
Lt+1 = Lt +αVκP
V (θP
V−Vt)∆t +κL(θL−Lt)∆t +αVξV
√
∆tVtϵ1
t+1 +ξL
√
∆tLtϵ2
t+1(13)
Ψt+1 = Ψ t +κΨ(θΨ− Ψt)∆t +ξΨ
√
∆tΨtϵ3
t+1, (14)
where the error terms ϵi
t+1, for i = 1 to 3, are i.i.d. standard normal. In the above state-space
system, we set the time step ∆ t = 1/252 to reﬂect the daily discretization interval. To keep
notation to a minimum, we apply the superscript P only to parameters under the physical
measure that diﬀer in values from their corresponding risk-neutral parameters.
We next describe the functional relationships linking the latent state variables to the
observed data used in the estimation. The ﬁrst observable is the illiquidity measure denoted
by ILQt, which we introduced earlier in Section 2. The other observables that we use are
daily at-the-money (ATM) and out-of-the-money (OTM) S&P 500 index options. These three
sets of observables are used in the measurement equations in the UKF procedure. We write
the system of measurement equations as follows:
log(ILQt+1) = log( Et[
∫ t+1
t
Lsds]) +u1
t+1 (15)
ATM O
t+1 = ATM M
t+1(Vt+1,Lt+1, Ψt+1) +u2
t+1 (16)
OTM O
t+1 = OTM M
t+1(Vt+1,Lt+1, Ψt+1) +u3
t+1, (17)
where measurement errorsui
t+1, fori = 1 to 3, are independent normal random variables with
constant variances. The above ﬁltering equations are applied to all trading days from January

+u3
t+1, (17)
where measurement errorsui
t+1, fori = 1 to 3, are independent normal random variables with
constant variances. The above ﬁltering equations are applied to all trading days from January
1, 2003 to April 26, 2016, resulting in 3,161 observation days.
The latent spot illiquidity process in the state-space dynamic describes the instantaneous
level of illiquidity at each moment and not at the aggregated daily level. To ﬁlter Lt from
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

the daily observed market illiquidity measure, we integrate the spot illiquidity process over
the day as shown in equation (15). Because the spot illiquidity measure is assumed to follow
a square-root process, its daily integrated value is available in closed form. We use the log
eﬀective spread in the measurement equation because the empirical distribution of eﬀective
spreads is close to log-normal.
We collect two time series of closing mid-price of options quotes that we label ATM and
OTM. We let ATM denote at-the-money call option that has moneyness, deﬁned as the ratio
of forward-to-strike price, closest to 1. Similarly, OTM refers to out-of-the-money put option
that has moneyness closest to 0.95. For both ATM and OTM options, we retain contracts
that have time-to-maturity closest to 30 calendar days. Figure 2 plots daily Black-Scholes
option-implied volatilities calculated from the ATM and OTM contracts that we use in our
study. Following Pan (2002), we use OTM options in the measurement equation as it provides
the richest information on investors’ expectation of crash probability in the stock market.
We follow Trolle and Schwartz (2009) and use Black-Scholes vega-weighted price as the
functional form in the measurement equations for options ﬁtting in equations (16)–(17). This
method scales the value of options across time making their prices more comparable, which in
turn facilitates the assumption of the normally distributed errors in the measure equations.

6)–(17). This
method scales the value of options across time making their prices more comparable, which in
turn facilitates the assumption of the normally distributed errors in the measure equations.
Therefore,ATM O
t+1 andOTM O
t+1 in equations (16)–(17) represent the scaled ATM and OTM
option prices observed at the end of day t. Similarly, the variables ATM M
t+1 and OTM M
t+1
denote the model-implied option prices scaled by their market Black-Scholes vega.
The models that we study fall within the aﬃne jump-diﬀusion framework and the con-
ditional characteristic function of log stock price is available in exponential aﬃne form. We
derive the characteristic function in Appendix C. The coeﬃcients in the characteristic function
are not all available in terms of elementary functions, thus, we solve for them numerically in
a Ricatti system of equations. We use the Fourier-cosine series expansions method recently
proposed by Fang and Oosterlee (2009) to numerically evaluate option prices.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

3.4 Estimation
We estimate the models by maximizing the log-likelihood function resulting from the UKF
step. We assume the measurement errors are conditionally normal, therefore, the time t con-
ditional log-likelihood takes the following form:
lt(Θ) =−1
2 log(2π)− 1
2 log(det|Ωt|)− 1
2(Yt− ¯Yt)T (Ωt)−1(Yt− ¯Yt), (18)
where ¯Yt and Ωt denote the ex ante forecasts of the mean and covariance matrix conditional
on time t− 1 information on observables Yt. We let Θ denote the set of all parameters to be
estimated.
In addition to the log-likelihood resulting from the measurement error equations, we follow
Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015a) and add a penalizing term that compares the ﬁltered
spot variance component,Vt, to the model-free estimate of spot variance calculated from high-
frequency data. Incorporating this penalizing term, the conditional log-likelihood function
that we estimate at time t is
Lt(Θ) =lt(Θ) +ω log( (
√
Vn
t −
√
Vt)2 ), (19)
where lt(Θ) is given by equation (18), Vn
t is the realized spot variance computed using one-
minute grid returns from the S&P 500 index andVt is the ﬁltered spot variance from the UKF
procedure. We describe the construction of the realized spot variance measure in more detail
in Appendix B. The realized spot volatility, √Vn
t , is shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2.
The tuning parameter ω in equation (19) is set equal to 0 .05 following Andersen, Fusari,

in more detail
in Appendix B. The realized spot volatility, √Vn
t , is shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2.
The tuning parameter ω in equation (19) is set equal to 0 .05 following Andersen, Fusari,
and Todorov (2015a).9 The model parameters are then estimated by maximizing the sum of
conditional log-likelihoods over the sample period from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016.
9We verify that our main conclusions are unaﬀected when using a reasonably large range of values for ω.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

4 Results
4.1 Maximum likelihood estimates
Table 2 reports parameter estimates for the three models. The ﬁrst, second, and third columns
report results for the SJ, SJV and SJVI models, respectively. We report log-likelihood values
of the three models in the bottom row.
All parameters reported in Table 2 correspond to risk-neutral measure estimates, with an
exception ofνV which represents the volatility risk premium. We ﬁnd that parameters govern-
ing the square-root dynamic of spot variance are well estimated. Their parameter estimates
are fairly consistent across the models. The correlation estimates of the two Brownian shocks
in return and spot variance, ρ, are about −0.70, conﬁrming the asymmetric return-variance
relationship found in the extant literature.
We ﬁnd the feedback eﬀects between the spot variance and illiquidity are signiﬁcant. This
is seen from the estimates ofαL andαV . Across the models, the estimates ofαL are about 0.12
while the estimates of αV are around 0.11. These estimates provides a support for a bivariate
relationship between market illiquidity and return variance.
The relationship that we ﬁnd between market illiquidity and return variance lends support
to previous studies that have documented a strong relationship between return volatility and
market trading activity. In particular, motivated by the mixture of distribution hypothesis
(MDH), which conjectures that volatility and volume simultaneously depend on a latent infor-

volatility and
market trading activity. In particular, motivated by the mixture of distribution hypothesis
(MDH), which conjectures that volatility and volume simultaneously depend on a latent infor-
mation process, past research eﬀorts have been devoted to studying the relationship between
stock return volatility and trading volume (e.g., Tauchen and Pitts, 1983). Nevertheless, the
ﬁndings in this literature have been mixed and understanding the relationship between infor-
mation ﬂows and trading activity has been an active research area. For instance, Lamoureux
and Lastrapes (1990) estimate a GARCH volatility model and ﬁnd that trading volume is the
main driver of stock return volatility and that past stock return innovations became insignif-
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

icant once trading volume is included in the model. 10 While we ﬁnd that market illiquidity
signiﬁcantly drives the dynamic of spot variance, its eﬀect does not eliminate the strong per-
sistence in the variance dynamic. Further, the recent literature agrees that trading volume
is an inadequate measure of market liquidity (e.g., Jones, 2002; Fleming, 2003). Given the
availability of intraday trading data, we can more precisely measure market illiquidity using
eﬀective spreads. Our results estimated using a continuous-time model documenting a strong
relationship between market illiquidity and return variance therefore contribute to this stream
of literature.
The jump-size mean, θ, and the jump-size standard deviation, δ, in Table 2 indicate that
the jump dynamic that we estimate corresponds to crash risk embedded in index options. The
estimates of θ are negative and highly signiﬁcant. The average jump mean size in daily index
return is between−3.1% (SJVI model) and−5.4% (SJ model). Therefore, the jump dynamic
that we identify corresponds to large drops in daily S&P 500 index returns. We ﬁnd that the
SJ model has the largest magnitudes of θ and δ.11
We next examine parameter estimates governing the time-varying jump intensity. First,
we look at the dynamic of the latent jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor, Ψ t. Table 2 shows the
magnitude of parameters driving the Ψ t dynamic in the SJ model diﬀers signiﬁcantly from
those in the other two models.

the dynamic of the latent jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor, Ψ t. Table 2 shows the
magnitude of parameters driving the Ψ t dynamic in the SJ model diﬀers signiﬁcantly from
those in the other two models. For instance, the long-run mean θΨ, the mean-reversion speed
κΨ, and the volatilityξΨ of the jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor are signiﬁcantly larger for the SJ
model. These ﬁndings are expected because in the SJ model, jump intensity dynamic solely
depends on the latent state variable Ψ t. Further, these results conﬁrm that the dynamic of
jump intensity is time-varying and follows a mean-reverting process.
10In contrast, several studies ﬁnd evidence conﬂicting with the MDH speciﬁcation. These studies include
Hiemstra and Jones (1994), Lamoureux and Lastrapes (1994), Richardson and Smith (1994), Andersen (1996),
and Andersen, Bondarenko, Kyle, and Obizhaeva (2016).
11It is worth noting that we do not need to specify the jump risk premium parameters (i.e., θ under the
P measure) because the estimation is performed on a panel of index options without using index returns.
Nevertheless, for completeness, we conducted a sequential estimation exercise under the physical measure in
Section IA.3 of the Internet Appendix to extract the jump risk premiums by ﬁtting the model to index returns
and ﬁnd that they are in line with the extant literature.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 2 shows that when we add covariates to the jump intensity dynamic in the SJV
and SJVI models, the log-likelihood value increases substantially. The improvement is large
with an increase of about 5% relative to the SJ model. 12 We therefore ﬁnd strong support for
modeling jump intensity as a function of economic covariates. Looking at the SJV model, we
ﬁnd the impact of spot variance on jump intensity, γV , is positive and statistically signiﬁcant
at the 1% level (t-statistic is 5 .40). This ﬁnding is consistent with Pan (2002), Bates (2006),
and Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015b).
For the SJVI model, we ﬁnd that when we add the market illiquidity measure to the jump
intensity speciﬁcation, the estimate of γV substantially decreases in magnitude (by about
76%). On the other hand, the impact of spot market illiquidity loads very strongly on the
jump intensity. This ﬁnding shows that the inclusion of market illiquidity as an economic
covariate signiﬁcantly weakens the relationship between jump intensity and spot variance.
4.2 Time-Varying Volatility and Crash Risks
This section discusses the time-series dynamics of market spot volatility and jump inten-
sity. Table 3 reports descriptive statistics of daily jump intensity λt, spot variance Vt, and
spot illiquidity Lt levels that we obtained using the UKF from 2003–2016. We ﬁnd that the
sample moments of daily spot illiquidity are almost identical across the three models. This

variance Vt, and
spot illiquidity Lt levels that we obtained using the UKF from 2003–2016. We ﬁnd that the
sample moments of daily spot illiquidity are almost identical across the three models. This
suggests that its dynamic is well identiﬁed when we extract their information from the daily
market illiquidity measure ILQt calculated using eﬀective bid-ask spreads.
Figure 3 plots the daily annualized jump intensity for the three models. The jump intensity
dynamic of the SJ model is very volatile relative to the other two models. For instance, looking
at the time-series statistics of λt in Table 3, we ﬁnd the average expected number of jumps
implied by this model is 0.81 per year, but with a median of 0.45 and a standard deviation of
1.10. This shows that the distribution of jump intensities ﬁltered from the SJ model is highly
12Section IA.4 in the Internet Appendix discusses in-sample option ﬁts of the three models that we study.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

skewed. The average jump intensity implied by the SJ model is slightly less than half of the
other models, and its jump mean size is larger at θ =−5.9% per jump as shown in Table 2. .
We ﬁnd the jump intensity dynamic estimated from the SJV and SJVI models have compa-
rable distributions with means of 2.0 and 2.4 jumps per year, respectively. In these two models,
the levels of jump intensity are relatively stable before mid-2007, but rise after and peak in
the fall of 2008. We believe the relatively more stable jump intensity dynamics observed in the
SJV and SJVI models compared to the SJ model are due to improved identiﬁcation resulting
from the use of covariates in the jump intensity speciﬁcation. This argument is supported by
the models’ log-likelihood, which are better than the SJ model.
We next examine the economic contribution of the spot variance and market illiquidity to
the jump intensity dynamic. Figure 4 decomposes daily jump intensities ﬁltered from the SJV
model (top panel) and from the SJVI model (bottom panel) into their respective components.
For the SJV model, the top panel of Figure 4 shows that the market’s spot variance is the
main component driving jump intensity dynamic. We ﬁnd that on average, 87% of the jump
intensity level is explained by its covariation with the market’s spot variance. The time-series
average of its contribution is about 87%. We ﬁnd the jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor Ψt explains
the remaining 13%.

evel is explained by its covariation with the market’s spot variance. The time-series
average of its contribution is about 87%. We ﬁnd the jump-intensity-speciﬁc factor Ψt explains
the remaining 13%.
The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the decomposition of the daily jump intensity from
the SJVI model. Here, we ﬁnd that the jump intensity dynamic is heavily driven by its co-
movement with stock market illiquidity. We plot daily percentage contributions of each jump
intensity component in Figure 5. On average, over our sample period, the market illiquidity
factor explains about 77% of the jump probability in the SJVI model. In contrast to our
ﬁndings for the SJV model, we ﬁnd the market’s spot variance explains, on average, only
13%, with the remaining 10% coming from the jump intensity factor, Ψ t. In other words,
once we control for market illiquidity as an economic variable driving time-varying crash risk,
the relative contribution of spot variance signiﬁcantly decreases.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

4.3 Forecast Error Variance Decomposition
We perform a forecast error variance decomposition (FEVD) on the jump intensityλτ dynamic
for the SJVI model. This method helps determine the amount of information each variable
contributes in explaining changes to the current and future crash probability.
The error from forecasting the jump intensityλt+τ withτ-period horizon on dayt is deﬁned
as
eλ
t+τ =λt+τ−Et[λt+τ]. (20)
The idea behind FEVD is to ﬁnd how much of the variation in eλ
t+τ, i.e., Var t
[
eλ
t+τ
]
, can
be explained by shocks to each state variable driving the jump intensity dynamic. In other
words, the FEVD asks how much of the unexpected change in the jump intensity is explained
by shocks to Vt, Lt, and Ψt. We report the FEVD formula in Appendix D.
In Figure 6, we plot the proportion of forecast error variance explained by innovations to
the spot variance, Vt, and the spot market illiquidity, Lt, factors. The model parameters are
obtained from their MLE estimates in Table 3. We do not plot the proportion of forecast
error variance explained by Ψt because it is trivially small. We plot the proportion of forecast
error variance explained byVt andLt one day ahead, i.e., τ = 1. These results provide insight
into the source of information that most importantly impacts unexpected changes in the crash
probability at the very short horizon.
We ﬁnd that errors in the short-term forecast of the crash probability are mainly explained

mation that most importantly impacts unexpected changes in the crash
probability at the very short horizon.
We ﬁnd that errors in the short-term forecast of the crash probability are mainly explained
by shocks to the market illiquidity factor, with the exception of the crisis period when shocks
to the spot variance dominate. This ﬁnding is consistent with the results shown in Figure
5. In other words, unexpected changes in crash probability at the near horizon are mostly
explained by shocks to market illiquidity.
In the Internet Appendix Section IA.5, we examine the impact of shocks to the spot
volatility Vt and the market illiquidity Lt over longer horizons by looking at the impulse
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

response function of the jump intensity dynamic. We ﬁnd that shocks to Vt andLt are highly
persistent and drive most of the current and future increase in the probability of crash risk.
However, the relative importance of Vt and Lt depends on the level of uncertainty in the
market, with the market illiquidity factor dominating during periods of low volatility.
4.4 Alternative Iliquidity Measures
We have so far deﬁned market illiquidity using the aggregate relative eﬀective spread of
S&P500 constituents. This section tests whether our main conclusions are robust to other
illiquidity measures. The ﬁrst alternative measure that we use is from Amihud (2002), which is
one of the most widely used illiquidity proxies in the ﬁnance literature. The advantage of this
measure is that it is simple to construct and relies on low-frequency data. On each day t, we
compute the Amihud illiquidity measure for each ﬁrm i in the S&P500 index as a fraction of
absolute return over dollar trading volume. The daily Amihud market illiquidity measure for
the stock market is then calculated as an equally-weighted average of the ﬁrm-level Amihud
illiquidity measure.
The second alternative measure for market illiquidity that we use is the relative eﬀective
spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures (“E-mini” for short). Originated by the Chicago Mer-
cantile Exchange (CME), E-mini contracts are one-ﬁfth the size of the standard S&P500
futures.

e relative eﬀective
spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures (“E-mini” for short). Originated by the Chicago Mer-
cantile Exchange (CME), E-mini contracts are one-ﬁfth the size of the standard S&P500
futures. They trade on the CME GLOBEX electronic platform almost 24 hours a day, ﬁve
days a week. Speciﬁcally, On Monday to Thursday, the trading is from 15:30 to 15:15 of
the next day. All times are reported in Chicago Time. On Sunday, the trading is from 17:00
to 15:15 the next day. We obtain best-bid-oﬀer (BBO) data for the S&P500 E-mini futures
from CME DataMine. The ﬁle contains “top-of-the-book” information. Quotes and trades
are time stamped to the second. This detailed transaction-level information is available from
November 1, 2004 onwards. As a result, the sample period that we use for this section is from
November 1, 2004 to April 26, 2016.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

We follow Andersen and Bondarenko (2015) and use the front month futures contract until
it reaches 8 days to expiry. This ensures that we use the most actively traded futures contract
in our analysis. The daily relative eﬀective spreads of the E-mini future contract is calculated
as the dollar-volume weighted average eﬀective spreads over each day. We deﬁne a trading-day
to be from 15:30 (or 17:00 for Sunday) after the NYSE market close to 15:15 the next day.
The minimum tick size for trading E-mini futures is 25 cents. Trades in this market is highly
liquid, and we ﬁnd that only about 8.1% of all trades are consummated outside the 25-cent
spread.
The middle-left panel of Figure 7 plots the illiquidity measure calculated using relative
eﬀective spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures, while the bottom-left panel plots the Amihud’s
(2002) measure. For comparison, the top-left panel plots the ILQt measure that we use in the
main analysis, which is based on aggregate relative eﬀective spreads of S&P500 constituents.
All illiquidity measures are plotted in annualized term and are normalized to have the same
sample mean. This normalization does not impact our results because the absolute level does
not matter for our speciﬁcation.
Figure 7 shows a great similarity between the illquidity measures calculated using aggregate
spreads of S&P500 ﬁrms (ILQt) and the spread of E-mini futures (E-miniILQt). The Pearson

our speciﬁcation.
Figure 7 shows a great similarity between the illquidity measures calculated using aggregate
spreads of S&P500 ﬁrms (ILQt) and the spread of E-mini futures (E-miniILQt). The Pearson
correlation between their levels is about 91%, while between their daily changes it is about
45%. We ﬁnd that the Amihud illiquidity measure is much noisier than the other two measures
which are calculated from intraday eﬀective spreads. The correlation between ILQt and the
Amihud measure is about 60% in levels, but only about 8% in daily changes.
We re-estimate the SJVI model using the two alternative illiquidity measures: E-miniILQt,
and AmihudILQt. We report the results in Table 4. We ﬁnd the coeﬃcient estimate of γL re-
mains statistically signiﬁcant in both columns, conﬁrming the important role of stock market
illiquidity as an economic drivers of the time-varying jump intensity.
Column (1) of Table 4 shows the magnitude ofγL is the smallest when the Amihud measure
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

is used, with the value of 8 .03 relative to 11 .1 in Column (3) of Table 2 when we use the
aggregate spread of S&P500 ﬁrms. This ﬁnding is expected due to the noisiness of the Amihud
measure as shown in Figure 7. Consistent with this observation, we ﬁnd that the dynamic
of the jump intensity depends more on the market variance under the Amihud illiquidity
measure, which is seen from the relatively large estimate of γV in Column (1). On the other
hand, we ﬁnd that all coeﬃcient estimates in Column (2), where the spread of E-mini futures
is used as the proxy of stock market illiquidity, are very similar to those in Column (3) of
Table 2.
The right-column panels of Figure 7 plot the jump intensity ﬁltered from the SJVI model
using three diﬀerent illiquidity measures. We ﬁnd that these three time series share a similar
pattern, with the results obtained using the Amihud measure appear slightly noisier.
Overall, our main conclusion remains qualitatively similar when the two alternative illiq-
uidity measures are used in the estimation of the SJVI model. That is, the time-varying
market crash risk embedded in index options is strongly related to the level of stock market
illiquidity.
5 Market Illiquidity and Option-implied Crash Risk
What are the economic drivers behind market illiquidity as captured by ILQt? And, what
is the channel through which these economic drivers aﬀect option prices? We examine these
questions in this section.

t are the economic drivers behind market illiquidity as captured by ILQt? And, what
is the channel through which these economic drivers aﬀect option prices? We examine these
questions in this section. Guided by market microstructure theories, we start by identify-
ing economic forces that drive variations in eﬀective spreads of the aggregate stock market.
Subsequently, we examine the importance of these economic drivers in explaining the stock
market crash risk that we observe in index option prices.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

5.1 What drives Stock Market Liquidity?
We examine three economic forces that have been shown to aﬀect security bid-ask spreads. The
ﬁrst is the inventory risk (e.g., Amihud and Mendelson, 1980; Ho and Stoll, 1981). Here, theory
predicts that liquidity is inﬂuenced by inventory concerns caused by an imbalance between
buyer- and sell-initiated trades. When market makers are faced with a large order imbalance,
they respond by widening the quoted spreads, resulting in deteriorating market liquidity.
We calculate daily order imbalance for each security as the number of buyer-initiated trades
minus the number of seller-initiated trades scaled by the total trading volume, where the direc-
tion of each trade is assigned using the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm. Aggregate inventory
risk in the stock market on day t is then calculated as the average daily order imbalance of
securities constituting the S&P500 index. We refer to this variable as AggInventoryt. For
an individual stock, a large order imbalance could be induced by informed trading. However,
when we average order imbalances across securities to the aggregate level, asymmetric infor-
mation is unlikely the reason (see Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2002)). This suggests
that ﬂuctuations in the aggregate order imbalance should only aﬀect the stock market liquid-
ity due to periodic strains in market maker inventories that are consistent with the inventory
paradigm.

s
that ﬂuctuations in the aggregate order imbalance should only aﬀect the stock market liquid-
ity due to periodic strains in market maker inventories that are consistent with the inventory
paradigm.
The second economic force driving ﬂuctuations in the level of aggregate stock market
illiquidity is the availability of arbitrage capital. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) shows
that in a market where traders participate in liquidity provisions, their ability to do so depends
on the funding available to them—e.g., arbitrage capital. When the funding available to
institutional investors and hedge funds is abundant, these traders can readily deploy arbitrage
capital to eliminate price deviations from fundamental values. This injection of liquidity
lowers the cost of liquidity provision by traditional liquidity providers (i.e., market makers),
thus, resulting in tighter bid-ask spreads. In order to measure variations in the daily level of
arbitrage captial, we use the noise measure of Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013), which has been
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

shown to capture episodes of liquidity crises across the ﬁnancial markets. This measure is
based on the U.S. Treasury market, which is centrally important to all types of investors.
When there is a shortage of arbitrage capital, Treasury yields would deviate more from freely
the model-implied curve, resulting in more noise in prices. We obtain daily time series of the
noise measure directly from Jun Pan’s website, which is available up to December 2014. 13 We
refer to this measure as Noiset, which is connected to the level of stock market illiquidity
through the amount of arbitrage capital available. This measure is annualized by multiplying
it with 252.
The third economic force behind stock market liquidity that we examine is adverse selection
cost. Liquidity providers, in general, revise their securities’ quotes in response to trades
initiated by informed and uninformed traders. However, when the market is dominated by
informed traders, adverse selection arises as the primary concern of liquidity providers thereby
pressuring them to widen their quotes (Glosten and Milgrom, 1985). In order to measure
the intensity of informed trading at the aggregate level, we look at daily abnormal order
ﬂows in S&P500 E-mini futures. The S&P500 E-mini futures market is among the most
liquid worldwide. It trades on an electronic platform nearly around the clock, serving as a
competitive venue for investors, speculators, and market makers to trade and hedge their

is among the most
liquid worldwide. It trades on an electronic platform nearly around the clock, serving as a
competitive venue for investors, speculators, and market makers to trade and hedge their
exposures to the stock market. Importantly, as concluded in the CFTC-SEC Report (2010),
the ﬂash crash on May 6, 2010 is believed to have been precipitated by a large sell order in
the E-mini contract.
We construct daily abnormal order ﬂow in the E-mini futures market using complete top-
of-the-book trading records obtained from CME DataMine. There are several advantages to
this database. The quote updates arrive in pairs, one for the bid and one for the ask. These
quotes are synchronized and ordered by the sequence variable, which makes it straightforward
to compare the trade price with the preceding bid and ask. Each trade is consummated
13http://www.mit.edu/~junpan/
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

at either the preceding bid or ask, which allows us to unambiguously classify a trade as
buyer-initiated or seller-initiated nearly without errors. 14 We obtain the complete history of
top-of-the-book data ﬁle for the E-mini contract (1997–2016). However, detailed sequencing
of trades and quotes in this data ﬁle begins on November 1st, 2004. Therefore, in this section,
the sample period is from November 1st, 2004 to December 30th, 2014, when the noise measure
that we obtain from Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013) ends. This provides us with slightly more than
10 years of tick-by-tick data for the highly active E-mini futures market. Over this period, the
median number of contracts traded is about 1.6 millions per day, with a median daily dollar
volume of $ 2.32 billions. The abnormal order ﬂow on day t is calculated as the number of
buyer initiated contracts minus the number of seller initiated contracts, divided by the total
trading volume. We refer to this variable as AbOrderFlow t.
Panel A of Table 5 summarizes the three economic variables that we describe above:
AggInventory , Noise, and AbOrderFlow . It is worth noting that these three variables are
sourced from three distinctly diﬀerent markets, which helps eliminate concerns that they are
related through market-microstructure mechanics. Besides these three variables, we include
MinRV andVIX in our analysis to control for the strong connection between market volatil-
ity and market illiquidity.

hrough market-microstructure mechanics. Besides these three variables, we include
MinRV andVIX in our analysis to control for the strong connection between market volatil-
ity and market illiquidity.
Panel B of Table 5 reports the Pearson correlation between various variables. We use
the absolute values of AbOrderFlow and AggInventory . This is because imbalances in the
number of trades, whether negative or positive, should positively aﬀect stock market illiquidity.
We ﬁnd that theILQ measure is positively correlated with aggregate inventory risk, intensity
of informed trading, shortage in arbitrage capital, and market volatility.
One challenge with identifying the drivers of stock market illiquidity is the endogenous
relationship between potential explanatory variables. In order to mitigate this issue, we es-
timate a vector autoregressive (VAR) model based on the six variables shown in Table 5,
14Andersen and Bondarenko (2015) provides detailed discussion on the advantage of this data set to construct
order imbalance measures for the E-mini futures.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

plus the return of the S&P500 index. Table 6 reports the results. We choose ﬁve lags for
the VAR model to control for autocorrelation in the residuals up to one week. Increasing
the number of autoregressive lags does not qualitatively change our conclusion. We include
year-ﬁxed eﬀects to control for a time trend. We also include day-of-the-week-ﬁxed eﬀects
because weekly regularities in market liquidity, order imbalance, and volatility are well doc-
umented. Each column in Table 6 reports estimation results for a diﬀerent VAR speciﬁca-
tion. For brevity, we only report estimates for the ﬁrst-autoregressive component that explain
ILQt+1 the next day. Columns (1) to (3) examine the impact of the three economic drivers:
Noiset,|AggInventoryt|,|AbOrderFlow t|, individually. In these three columns, the VAR
speciﬁcation consists of ﬁve variables. In Column (4), we report results from estimating the
VAR model on all seven variables. The Durbin-Watson statistic in each column is close to 2,
indicating little to no autocorrelations left in the residuals.
The results in Table 6 show strong and positive coeﬃcient estimates on ILQt, suggesting
that daily stock market illiquidity depends on its past levels. We ﬁnd that market illiquidity
increases following a day with negative stock market return. These ﬁndings are consistent
with the existing literature (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2001). We also ﬁnd that

rket illiquidity
increases following a day with negative stock market return. These ﬁndings are consistent
with the existing literature (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2001). We also ﬁnd that
theVIX t positively predicts an increase in the stock market illiquidity the next day, which is
consistent with Nagel (2012) who shows that the VIX index is a strong predictor of the return
from liquidity provisions. However, we do not ﬁnd that MinRVt signiﬁcantly predicts market
illiquidity the next day after controlling for the lead-lag relationships through the VAR model.
We ﬁnd thatNoiset and|AbOrderFlow t| are strong predictors of stock market illiquidity.
The economic magnitude of their impacts is substantial. Looking at Column (4) in Table 6,
we ﬁnd that a one-standard-deviation increase in Noiset leads to an about 13% increase in
ILQt+1, or approximately, a two-cent increase in the annualized round-trip trading cost for
every dollar investment in the stock market. The economic magnitude of |AbOrderFlow t| is
about half of the Noiset measure.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

We do not ﬁnd that|AggInventoryt| has predictive power for stock market illiquidity after
controlling for the lead-lag relationships associated with return and volatility of the stock mar-
ket. Columns (3) and (4) both show that coeﬃcients on |AggInventoryt| are not statistically
signiﬁcant, albeit positive. This ﬁnding is consistent with Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam
(2002). Their study ﬁnds that the aggregate order imbalance in either direction contempora-
neously reduces stock market liquidity, but it cannot predict market liquidity after controlling
for return and volatility. This ﬁnding is also consistent with inventory models of the spread
(Ho and Stoll, 1981, e.g.), which shows that order imbalances cause a temporary shift in quotes
but do not aﬀect market liquidity. In other words, the eﬀect of aggregate order imbalances
on stock market liquidity is transitory in nature.
In summary, we ﬁnd that the availability of arbitrage capital and the intensity of informed
trading (i.e., adverse selection cost) are robust drivers of stock market illiquidity. In the next
section, we examine the importance of these two variables in explaining time-varying crash
risk that we observe from index option prices.
5.2 Impact on Option Prices
This section provides evidence on the channel through which the Noiset and|AbOrderFlow t|
measures impact the time-varying crash risk that we infer from option prices. We follow our

on Option Prices
This section provides evidence on the channel through which the Noiset and|AbOrderFlow t|
measures impact the time-varying crash risk that we infer from option prices. We follow our
analysis in Section 2.2 and examine whether these two variables can explain the day-to-day
change in the stock market’s risk-neutral skewness implicit in the S&P500 index options. The
results are reported in Table 7.
Column (1) shows the coeﬃcient estimate on ∆ Noiset is negative and signiﬁcant. This
suggests that when the amount of arbitrage capital in the market decreases, crash risk in the
stock market increases as indicated by a more negative risk-neutral skewness. The impact
of daily changes in the noise measure is consistently negative and statistically signiﬁcant in
Column (2), as well as in Column (4) where we include ∆ ILQt as an explanatory variable.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

This ﬁnding provides support for “limits to arbitrage” in explaining the relative pricing of
index options (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). During periods where liquidity providers face
funding constraint, they are less willing to deploy arbitrage capital to help keep the relative
prices of OTM puts to ATM calls in line with fundamental values. As OTM puts become
increasingly more expensive relative to ATM calls, the risk-neutral skewness implied by index
options drop, signaling a higher risk-neutral probability of crash risk.
The results in Column (1) of Table 7 show that the coeﬃcient estimate on ∆|AbOrderFlow t|
is negative, but not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels. This result is based on the
magnitude of abnormal order ﬂow, regardless of the direction, in the E-mini futures market.
We further examine the impact of negative order ﬂows and positive order ﬂows separately.
The results are shown in Columns (2) and (4). We use abnormal order ﬂow on day t to deﬁne
buy- and sell-order ﬂows as follows:
BuyOrderFlow t = max (0 ,AbOrderFlow t)
SellOrderFlow t = − min (0,AbOrderFlow t).
We ﬁnd a clear pattern in the eﬀect of adverse selection cost on risk-neutral skewness when
we examine buy and sell order ﬂows separately. The results in Table 7 show that an excessive
selling pressure in the S&P500 E-mini futures market is related to a more negative risk-neutral
skewness observed in index option prices. On the other hand, the impact of excessive buying

n excessive
selling pressure in the S&P500 E-mini futures market is related to a more negative risk-neutral
skewness observed in index option prices. On the other hand, the impact of excessive buying
pressure is not statistically signiﬁcant. These ﬁndings suggest that excessive sell orders in the
E-mini futures market trigger liquidity providers in the options market to revise their quotes
in order to compensate for the risk of trading against informed traders. In particular, the
cost of providing insurance against a drop in the index by underwriting OTM puts increases
when these underwriters (i.e., liquidity providers) detect more excessive selling in the E-mini
futures market, forcing them to raise the price of OTM puts. This, in turn, leads to a more
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

negative risk-neutral skewness implied by index options.
Column (4) in Table 7 shows that the coeﬃcient estimates on the change in noise measure
and the change in sell order ﬂow remain strongly signiﬁcant and with similar magnitudes when
we include them in a single regression speciﬁcation. We also ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient estimate
on ∆ILQt is negative in Column (4), however, its magnitude and statistical signiﬁcance are
weaker than that in Column (3) where the variables ∆ Noiset and ∆SellOrderFlow t are
excluded. This ﬁnding suggests that some of the explanatory power of the illiquidity measure
is captured by the noise and sell-order ﬂow measures.
6 Conclusion
We estimate a continuous-time model with stochastic volatility and crash probability. We
introduce market illiquidity as an observable variable to the model by allowing it to aﬀect
the spot variance and jump risk intensity. We measure the daily stock market illiquidity level
using volume-weighted intraday bid-ask spreads of all S&P500 securities. We estimate the
model over 2003–2016 using daily S&P500 index options, realized spot variance and market
illiquidity measure. Over our sample period, we ﬁnd that about three-quarter of the time-
varying crash risk level is related to market illiquidity. During quiet periods, the inﬂuence
of market illiquidity dominates other factors that we examine including the market’s spot
variance. However, during the 2008-subprime crisis, the spot variance dominates and the

periods, the inﬂuence
of market illiquidity dominates other factors that we examine including the market’s spot
variance. However, during the 2008-subprime crisis, the spot variance dominates and the
contribution of market illiquidity falls to about 30%. We conclude that both the volatility and
market illiquidity factors play important and complementary roles in the dynamic of time-
varying crash risk. Finally, we examine the economic forces that lead to the stock market
illiquidity, which subsequently aﬀects the crash probability implied by index option prices and
ﬁnd that the shortage of arbitrage capital and adverse selection cost facing liquidity providers
are key economic drivers.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

References
Amaya, D., P. Christoﬀersen, K. Jacobs, and A. Vasquez, 2015, “Does Realized Skewness
Predict the Cross-section of Equity Returns?,” Journal of Financial Economics , 118(1),
135–167.
Amihud, Y., 2002, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Eﬀects,”
Journal of Financial Markets , 5(1), 31–56.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1980, “Dealership Market: Market-Making with Inventory,”
Journal of Financial Economics , 8(1), 31 – 53.
Andersen, T. G., 1996, “Return Volatility and Trading Volume: An Information Flow Inter-
pretation of Stochastic Volatility,” The Journal of Finance , 51(1), 169–204.
Andersen, T. G., L. Benzoni, and J. Lund, 2002, “An Empirical Investigation of Continuous-
Time Equity Return Models,” Journal of Finance , 57, 1239–1284.
Andersen, T. G., and O. Bondarenko, 2015, “Assessing Measures of Order Flow Toxicity and
Early Warning Signals for Market Turbulence,” Review of Finance, 19(1), 1–54.
Andersen, T. G., O. Bondarenko, A. S. Kyle, and A. A. Obizhaeva, 2016, “Intraday Trading
Invariance in the E-Mini S&P 500 Futures Market,” .
Andersen, T. G., D. Dobrev, and E. Schaumburg, 2012, “Jump-Robust Volatility Estimation
Using Nearest Neighbor Truncation,” Journal of Econometrics , 169(1), 75–93.
Andersen, T. G., N. Fusari, and V. Todorov, 2015a, “Parametric Inference and Dynamic State
Recovery From Option Panels,” Econometrica, 83(3), 1081–1145.
, 2015b, “The Risk Premia Embedded in Index Options,” Journal of Financial Eco-

. Todorov, 2015a, “Parametric Inference and Dynamic State
Recovery From Option Panels,” Econometrica, 83(3), 1081–1145.
, 2015b, “The Risk Premia Embedded in Index Options,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 117(3), 558–584.
, 2016, “The Pricing of Tail Risk and the Equity Premium: Evidence from International
Option Markets,” Working paper.
Bakshi, G., P. Carr, and L. Wu, 2008, “Stochastic Risk Premiums, Stochastic Skewness in
Currency Options, and Stochastic Discount Factors in International Economies,” Journal
of Financial Economics , 87(1), 132–156.
Bakshi, G., and D. Madan, 2000, “Spanning and Derivative Security Valuation,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 55(2), 205–238.
Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O. E., and N. Shephard, 2004, “Power and Bipower Variation with Stochas-
tic Volatility and Jumps,” Journal of Financial Econometrics , 2(1), 1–37.
Bates, D., 2006, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Latent Aﬃne Processes,” Review of
Financial Studies, 26(9), 909–965.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Brogaard, J., D. Li, and Y. Xia, 2016, “Stock Liquidity and Default Risk,”Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen, 2009, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
The Review of Financial Studies , 22(6), 2201–2238.
CFTC-SEC, 2010, Preliminary Findings Regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010: Report
of the Staﬀs of the CFTC and SEC to the Joint Advisory Committee on Emerging Regulatory
Issues. U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Chae, J., 2005, “Trading Volume, Information Asymmetry, and Timing Information,” The
Journal of Finance , 60(1), 413–442.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2001, “Market Liquidity and Trading Activity,”
The Journal of Finance , 56(2), 501–530.
, 2002, “Order Imbalance, Liquidity, and Market Returns,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 65(1), 111 – 130.
Chung, K. H., and C. Chuwonganant, 2014, “Uncertainty, Market Structure, and Liquidity,”
Journal of Financial Economics , 113(3), 476–499.
Duﬃe, D., J. Pan, and K. Singleton, 2000, “Transform Analysis and Asset Pricing for Aﬃne
Jump-diﬀusions,” Econometrica, 68(6), 1343–1376.
Egloﬀ, D., M. Leippold, and L. Wu, 2010, “The Term Structure of Variance Swap Rates and
Optimal Variance Swap Investments,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 45,
1279–1310.
Fang, F., and C. W. Oosterlee, 2009, “A Novel Pricing Method for European Options Based on
Fourier-Cosine Series Expansions,” SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing , 31(2), 826–848.

is , 45,
1279–1310.
Fang, F., and C. W. Oosterlee, 2009, “A Novel Pricing Method for European Options Based on
Fourier-Cosine Series Expansions,” SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing , 31(2), 826–848.
Fleming, M. J., 2003, “Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity,” Economic Policy Review, (9),
83–108.
Glosten, L. R., and P. R. Milgrom, 1985, “Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialist
Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders,” Journal of Financial Economics , 14(1),
71–100.
Goyenko, R. Y., C. W. Holden, and C. A. Trzcinka, 2009, “Do Liquidity Measures Measure
Liquidity?,” Journal of Financial Economics , 92(2), 153–181.
Heston, S., 1993, “A Closed-Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility with Appli-
cations to Bond and Currency Options,” Review of Financial Studies , 6(2), 327–343.
Hiemstra, C., and J. D. Jones, 1994, “Testing for Linear and Nonlinear Granger Causality in
the Stock Price-Volume Relation,” The Journal of Finance , 49(5), 1639–1664.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Ho, T., and H. R. Stoll, 1981, “Optimal Dealer Pricing under Transactions and Return Un-
certainty,” Journal of Financial Economics , 9(1), 47–73.
Hu, G. X., J. Pan, and J. Wang, 2013, “Noise as Information for Illiquidity,” The Journal of
Finance, 68(6), 2341–2382.
Huang, X., and G. Tauchen, 2005, “The Relative Contribution of Jumps to Total Price Vari-
ance,” Journal of Financial Econometrics , 3(4), 456–499.
Jiang, G. J., and T. Yao, 2013, “Stock Price Jumps and Cross-Sectional Return Predictability,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 48, 1519–1544.
Jones, C. M., 2002, “A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs,” Working
Paper.
Kozhan, R., A. Neuberger, and P. Schneider, 2014, “The Skew Risk Premium in the Equity
Index Market,” Review of Financial Studies , 26(9), 2174–2203.
Lamoureux, C. G., and W. D. Lastrapes, 1990, “Heteroskedasticity in Stock Return Data:
Volume Versus GARCH Eﬀects,” Journal of Finance , 45(1), 221–229.
, 1994, “Endogenous Trading Volume and Momentum in Stock-Return Volatility,”
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 12(2), 253–260.
Lee, C. M. C., and M. J. Ready, 1991, “Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data,” The
Journal of Finance , 46(2), 733–746.
Maheu, J., and T. McCurdy, 2004, “News Arrival, Jump Dynamics, and Volatility Compo-
nents for Individual Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance , 59(2), 755–793.
Nagel, S., 2012, “Evaporating Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies , 25(7), 2005–2039.

Dynamics, and Volatility Compo-
nents for Individual Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance , 59(2), 755–793.
Nagel, S., 2012, “Evaporating Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies , 25(7), 2005–2039.
Ornthanalai, C., 2014, “L´ evy Jump Risk: Evidence from Options and Returns,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 112(1), 69–90.
Pan, J., 2002, “The Jump-Risk Premia Implicit in Options: Evidence from an Integrated
Time-Series Study,” Journal of Financial Economics , 63, 3–50.
Richardson, M., and T. Smith, 1994, “A Direct Test of the Mixture of Distributions Hy-
pothesis: Measuring the Daily Flow of Information,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 29, 101–116.
Santa-Clara, P., and S. Yan, 2010, “Crashes, Volatility, and the Equity Premium: Lessons
from S&P 500 Options,” Review of Economics and Statistics , 92(2), 435–451.
Schwert, G. W., 1989, “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?,” The Journal
of Finance, 44(5), 1115–1153.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance , 52(1),
35–55.
Tauchen, G., and M. Pitts, 1983, “The Price Variability-Volume Relationship on Speculative
Markets,” Econometrica, 51(2), 485–505.
Trolle, A. B., and E. S. Schwartz, 2009, “Unspanned Stochastic Volatility and the Pricing of
Commodity Derivatives,” Review of Financial Studies , 22(11), 4423–4461.
Van der Merwe, R., and E. A. Wan, 2001, “The Square-Root Unscented Kalman Filter for
State and Parameter-Estimation,” in Proceedings. 2001 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 6, pp. 3461–3464.
White, H., 1980, “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48(4), 817–838.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 1: ARMA Models for Changes in Risk-Neutral Skewness
∆RNSkewt
(1) (2) (3) (4)
∆MinRVt -0.040 0.388*
(-0.23) (1.66)
∆ILQt -0.714** -1.110***
(-2.33) (-2.87)
Returnt -0.663*** -0.678*** -0.977*** -0.981***
(-4.06) (-3.81) (-4.35) (-4.57)
∆RNSkewt−1 0.472*** 0.471*** 0.465*** 0.466***
(22.33) (22.23) (21.87) (22.04)
R2 21.7% 21.7% 21.9% 22.0%
Notes: We report regression results on daily changes in risk-neutral skewness of S&P500 index
returns, ∆RSkewt. The sample period is from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. Risk-neutral
skewness, RSkewt, is calculated from end-of-the-day S&P500 index option prices with ma-
turity closest to 30 days. We use the nonparametric method of Bakshi and Madan (2000) to
calculate the 30-day forward-looking risk-neutral skewness measure. The independent vari-
ables include change in realized variance estimator, ∆ MinRV , from Andersen, Dobrev, and
Schaumburg (2012); changes in the market illiquidity proxy; ∆ILQ, measured by daily aver-
aged eﬀective spreads across ﬁrms in the S&P500 constituents; Return, log S&P500 return.
Each speciﬁcation is estimated using maximum likelihood. We use an ARMA(2,1) structure
in the regression model, which is determined by the LjungBox test to suﬃciently remove cross-
correlations in the residuals. We control for seasonality by including the day-of-the-week ﬁxed
eﬀects. Robust t-statistic is reported in parenthesis below each parameter estimate. ***, **,

ve cross-
correlations in the residuals. We control for seasonality by including the day-of-the-week ﬁxed
eﬀects. Robust t-statistic is reported in parenthesis below each parameter estimate. ***, **,
and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively.
The last row reports the R2 for each regression model.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 2: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: 2003–2016
(1) SJ Model (2) SJV Model (3) SJVI Model
λt = Ψt λt = Ψt +γVVt λt = Ψt+γVVt+γLLt
Parameter Estimate Estimate Estimate
Panel A. Filtered state dynamics
κV 4.502 4.032 4.142
(53.75) (49.21) (54.15)
θV 0.031 0.029 0.028
(6.89) (5.39) (8.62)
ξV 0.289 0.269 0.268
(5.87) (3.98) (5.35)
νV -1.743 -1.766 -1.730
(-22.56) (-15.98) (-7.34)
κL 2.712 2.548 2.547
(56.26) (21.10) (42.86)
θL 0.164 0.159 0.159
(3.82) (5.60) (5.91)
ξL 0.180 0.172 0.170
(3.73) (3.98) (8.08)
κΨ 4.126 0.887 0.677
(58.27) (1.59) (3.66)
θΨ 1.615 0.122 0.102
(24.42) (0.72) (0.85)
ξΨ 0.561 0.186 0.204
(7.01) (0.34) (1.32)
ρ -0.792 -0.659 -0.681
(-10.67) (-4.37) (-8.81)
Panel B. Jump-size parameters
θ -0.054 -0.032 -0.031
(-13.13) (-18.79) (-16.68)
δ 0.037 0.030 0.031
(8.70) (4.43) (6.09)
Panel C. Loadings on covariates
αV 0.123 0.110 0.110
(3.87) (9.31) (4.25)
αL 0.117 0.112 0.117
(5.90) (7.15) (7.94)
γV 63.004 14.879
(5.40) (4.91)
γL 11.079
(8.39)
Log-Likelihood: 13,928.86 14,654.12 14,670.55
Notes: We report MLEs of the three time-varying jump models: SJ, SJV, and SJVI. The sample
period is from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. Each model is estimated using daily OTM
and ATM S&P500 index options, averaged eﬀective spreads of S&P500 constituents, and spot
variance estimated from one-minute high-frequency S&P500 futures data. We maximize the log
likelihood function in equation (19). The state variables are estimated using the UKF. We report

s, and spot
variance estimated from one-minute high-frequency S&P500 futures data. We maximize the log
likelihood function in equation (19). The state variables are estimated using the UKF. We report
t-statistic calculated using the outer product of the gradient in parenthesis below each parameter
estimate.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics of Filtered Jump Intensities and Spot Variances
(1) SJ Model (2) SJV Model (3) SJVI Model
λt = Ψt λt = Ψt +γVVt λt = Ψt+γVVt+γLLt
Panel A. Jump intensity λt
Mean 0.8127 2.0224 2.4052
Median 0.4468 1.0933 2.0631
Std. Dev. 1.1044 2.9575 1.3521
25 percentile 0.2078 0.7003 1.7161
75 percentile 0.9898 2.0753 2.6691
Panel B. Spot variance Vt
Mean 0.0229 0.0279 0.0276
Median 0.0120 0.0126 0.0114
Std. Dev. 0.0948 0.0461 0.0476
25 percentile 0.0068 0.0078 0.0067
75 percentile 0.0233 0.0278 0.0268
Panel C. Spot illiquidity Lt
Mean 0.1587 0.1586 0.1586
Median 0.1481 0.1482 0.1480
Std. Dev. 0.0579 0.0577 0.0579
25 percentile 0.1245 0.1245 0.1245
75 percentile 0.1743 0.1744 0.1742
Notes: We report descriptive statistics of the ﬁltered jump intensity λt, spot variance Vt,
and spot illiquidity Lt for the three models: SJ, SJV, and SJVI. The variables are reported
in annualized terms by multiplying their daily values by 252. We obtain the ﬁltered state
variables from the UKF step in the MLE estimation. Parameter estimates of the three models
are reported in Table 2.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 4: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Alternative Illiquidity Measures
SJVI Model:λt = Ψt +γVVt +γLLt
(1) Amihud ILQ (2) E-mini ILQ
Parameter Estimate Estimate
Panel A. Filtered state dynamics
κV 4.286 4.066
(34.29) (40.07)
θV 0.028 0.027
(8.95) (8.11)
ξV 0.266 0.268
(4.28) (5.90)
νv -1.740 -1.726
(-5.39) (-7.02)
κL 3.567 2.565
(70.35) (24.89)
θL 0.162 0.153
(6.00) (6.94)
ξL 0.210 0.170
(4.57) (5.66)
κΨ 0.666 0.678
(2.74) (5.22)
θΨ 0.153 0.105
(1.02) (0.88)
ξΨ 0.186 0.205
(0.95) (0.97)
ρ -0.663 -0.689
(-12.38) (-8.58)
Panel B. Jump-size parameters
θ -0.030 -0.031
(-11.03) (-16.81)
δ 0.036 0.031
(9.89) (11.22)
Panel C. Loadings on covariates
αV 0.111 0.110
(5.71) (6.54)
αL 0.119 0.117
(7.60) (5.49)
γV 21.010 14.884
(4.46) (3.09)
γL 8.034 9.493
(2.07) (4.45)
Notes: We report MLE parameter estimates for the SJVI model estimated using two alternative
illiquidity measures. In the ﬁrst column, the daily illiquidity measure is calculated following
Amihud (2002). The daily Amihud illiquidity measure is calculated at the stock level, and
then aggregated across S&P500 ﬁrms. The second column reports results using relative eﬀective
spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures as the measure of stock market illiquidity. See Section 4.4
for more details. T-statistics calculated using the outer product of the gradients are reported in
parentheses.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 5: Summary Statistics of Selected Variables
Panel A. Variable Description
Variable Description Data source Mean Stdev Min Max
ILQ Aggregate eﬀective spreads NYSE TAQ 0.156 0.061 0.073 0.710
of S&P 500 ﬁrms
Noise Arbitrage capital in the Hu, Pan and 0.078 0.080 0.018 0.516
U.S. Treasury Wang (2013)
AggInventory Aggregate order imbalance NYSE TAQ 0.010 0.031 −0.096 0.163
of S&P 500 ﬁrms
AbOrderFlow Order imbalance of CME 0.002 0.028 -0.102 0.128
S&P 500 E-mini futures
MinRV Diﬀusive variance TickData 0.022 0.065 0.001 1.934
of S&P 500 cash index
VIX S&P 500 option-implied CBOE 0.199 0.099 0.099 0.809
volatility
Panel B. Pearson Correlation Coeﬃcients
ILQ Noise |AggInventory| | AbOrderFlow| MinRV VIX
ILQ 1 0.803 0.135 0.034 0.717 0.863
Noise 1 0.016 −0.065 0.531 0.830
|AggInventory| 1 0.39 0.051 −0.020
|AbOrderFlow| 1 −0.086 −0.130
MinRV 1 0.671
VIX 1
Notes: This table summarizes the key variables that we examine in relation to the market
illiquidity measure, ILQ. Panel A describes the variables, their data source, and report
descriptive statistics. Panel B reports the Pearson correlations between the six variables. The
sample period is from November 1, 2004 to December 30, 2014.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 6: Vector Autoregression Model (VAR) on ILQt+1
Next Day Illiquidity: ILQt+1
(1) (2) (3) (4)
ILQt 0.294*** 0.300*** 0.301*** 0.289***
(12.64) (12.90) (12.92) (12.36)
Noiset 0.129** 0.129**
(2.03) (2.02)
|AggInventoryt| 0.037 0.029
(1.53) (1.17)
|AbOrderFlow t| 0.059** 0.052**
(2.52) (2.13)
MinRVt -0.009 -0.012 -0.011 -0.006
(-0.70) (-1.01) (0.31) (-0.49)
VIX t 0.115*** 0.120*** 0.110** 0.108**
(2.65) (2.75) (2.54) (2.47)
Returnt -0.311*** -0.317*** -0.320*** -0.321***
(-5.23) (-5.35) (-5.52) (-5.35)
R2 89.3% 89.3% 89.3% 89.4%
Notes: We report results from estimating a vector autoregressive (VAR) model with ﬁve lags
based on seven daily time-series variables from November 1, 2004 to December 30, 2014. We
estimate four diﬀerent VAR speciﬁcations. Each column reports estimation results for a VAR
speciﬁcation. For brevity, we only report coeﬃcient estimates of the ﬁrst-order autoregressive
component in the VAR model for the dependent variable of interest, ILQ, which is the aggre-
gate illiquidity measure. In Columns (1)–(3), ﬁve variables are included in the VAR model.
In Column (4), all seven variables are included in the VAR model. Noise is the measure
of Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013), which are the errors from ﬁtting daily U.S. Treasury yield
curves.|AggInvestory| is the absolute value of aggregate inventory risk of securities in the
S&P 500 index,|AbOrderFlow t| is the absolute value of abnormal order ﬂow in the S&P500
E-mini futures contracts.

.|AggInvestory| is the absolute value of aggregate inventory risk of securities in the
S&P 500 index,|AbOrderFlow t| is the absolute value of abnormal order ﬂow in the S&P500
E-mini futures contracts. MinRVt is the jump-free variance of S&P500 cash index. VIX is
the CBOE’s VIX index, and Return represents the log daily return of S&P500 index. See the
text for more details on these variables. Year-ﬁxed eﬀects and day-of-the-week-ﬁxed eﬀects are
included but not reported. We report heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistic in parentheses
below each parameter estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table 7: Explaining Change in Risk-Neutral Skewness with Illiquidity-related Variables
Change in Risk-Neutral Skewness: ∆RNSkewt
(1) (2) (3) (4)
∆Noiset -2.177** -2.159** -2.101**
(-2.26) (-2.24) (-2.18)
∆|AbOrderFlow t| -0.642
(-1.63)
∆BuyOrderFlow t -0.445 -0.491
(-0.99) (-1.09)
∆SellOrderFlow t -1.164** -1.247**
(-2.27) (-2.43)
∆ILQt -1.170*** -0.916**
(-2.82) (-2.11)
∆MinRVt 0.151 0.152 0.496* 0.454*
(0.68) (0.69) (1.88) (1.72)
Returnt -3.978*** -4.317*** -3.876*** -4.458***
(-7.94) (-7.59) (-7.75) (-7.79)
∆RNSkewt−1 0.473*** 0.474*** 0.475*** 0.473***
(19.95) (20.03) (19.76) (19.80)
R2 24.91% 25.06% 24.76% 25.24%
Notes: We report regression results on daily changes in risk-neutral skewness of S&P500
index returns, ∆RSkewt. The sample period is from November 1, 2004 to December 30, 2014.
We use an ARMA(2,1) structure in the regression model. Each speciﬁcation is estimated
using maximum likelihood. We control for seasonality due to the day-of-the-week eﬀect. Risk-
neutral skewness, RSkewt, on day t is calculated from end-of-the-day S&P 500 index option
prices with maturity closest to 30 days. We use the nonparametric method of Bakshi and
Madan (2000) to calculate the 30-day forward-looking risk-neutral skewness measure. The
independent variables include change in realized variance estimator, ∆ MinRV ; change in
market illiquidity, ∆ILQ; and log S&P 500 return, Return. In addition, we include two

al skewness measure. The
independent variables include change in realized variance estimator, ∆ MinRV ; change in
market illiquidity, ∆ILQ; and log S&P 500 return, Return. In addition, we include two
variables from Table 6 that are strong predictors of ILQ: change in the noise measure of Hu,
Pan, and Wang (2013), ∆Noise; and change in the absolute abnormal order ﬂow in S&P500
E-mini futures, ∆|AbOrderFlow t|. In Columns (3) and (4), we split the abnormal order ﬂow
into the buy and sell components. We deﬁne BuyOrderFlow t = max(0,AbOrderFlow t), and
SellOrderFlow t =− min(0,AbOrderFlow t). We report t-statistic in parentheses below each
parameter estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
conﬁdence levels, respectively.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 1: Daily Time Series of Stock Market Variables
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
S&P 500 Index Return
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Annualized Illiquidity Measure
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Annualized Jump-robust Realized Variance: MinRV
Notes: This ﬁgure plots four daily time series of selected variables for the S&P500 index. The sample period
is from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. The top panel plots the daily returns on the S&P500 index.
In the middle panel, we plot the annualized illiquidity measure calculated as the equally-weighted average
eﬀective spread of intraday trades across ﬁrms constituting the S&P500 index. The bottom panel plots the
annualized jump-robust variance, MinR V, estimated using the one-minute grid returns of S&P500 cash index.
It is calculated following the approach of Andersen, Dobrev, and Schaumburg (2012).
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 2: Implied Volatilities of OTM and ATM Options and Spot Volatility
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Implied Volatilities of OTM Options
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Implied Volatilities of ATM Options
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Annualized Spot Volatilities
Notes: In the top panel, we plot the daily implied volatility of OTM put options written on the S&P500
index from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. In the second panel, we plot the implied volatility of ATM
call options. Both options are chosen to have time to maturity closest to 30 calendar days. OTM options
are chosen to have forward price-to-strike ratio closest to 0.95 while ATM options have the same ratio being
closest to 1. The last panel plots the time series of the spot volatility measure constructed using one-minute
grid of intraday returns at 4:00 p.m. each day, following Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015b).
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 3: Filtered Jump Intensities: λt
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
5
10
15
20 Filtered Annualized Jump Intensity: SJ Model
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
5
10
15
20
Filtered Annualized Jump Intensity: SJV Model
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
5
10
15
20 Filtered Annualized Jump Intensity: SJVI Model
Notes: We plot daily annualized jump intensities λt ﬁltered for the three models that we study from January
2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. The jump intensity speciﬁcations in the three models can be summarized as follows:
SJ : λt = Ψ t
SJV : λt = Ψ t +γVVt
SJVI : λt = Ψ t +γVVt +γLLt.
The top panel corresponds to the SJ model that has a jump intensity solely driven by a latent jump intensity
term; the middle panel corresponds to the SJV model that has a jump intensity driven by a latent stochastic
jump intensity and variance; and the bottom panel corresponds to the SJVI model that has a jump intensity
driven by a latent stochastic jump intensity, variance, and illiquidity.
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 4: Decomposition of Jump Intensity: SJV vs. SJVI
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
5
10
15
20 Decomposition of Jump Intensity: SJV Model
Latent
Variance
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
5
10
15
20 Decomposition of Jump Intensity: SJVI Model
Latent
Variance
Illiquidity
Notes: We plot the decomposition of the daily annualized jump intensities λt ﬁltered from the SJV model (top
panel) and the SJVI model (bottom panel) from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. The top panel decomposes
daily jump intensity dynamics of the SJV model into the portion coming from the latent stochastic jump
intensity term, Ψt, and the portion that is due to the daily spot variance, γVVt. In the bottom panel, we
decompose daily jump intensity dynamics of the SJVI model into the portion coming from the latent stochastic
jump-intensity-speciﬁc term Ψt, the portion that is due to the daily spot variance, γVVt, and the portion that
is due to daily spot market illiquidity, γLLt.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 5: Relative Contribution to Jump Intensity for the SJVI Model
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
50
100 Jump Intensity from Latent Factor (Mean = 10.35%)
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
20
40
60
80
100 Jump Intensity from Variance (Mean = 12.64%)
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
0
50
100 Jump Intensity from Liquidity (Mean = 77.01%)
Notes: We plot the breakdown of the daily annualized jump intensity,λt = Ψt +γVVt +γLLt, ﬁltered from the
SJVI model from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016. The top panel plots the percentage contribution coming
from the latent stochastic jump intensity term, Ψ t/λt. The middle panel plots the contribution coming from
the variance term, γVVt/λt. The bottom panel plots the contribution from the illiquidity term, γlLt/λt.
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 6: Proportion of Forecast Error Variance (ˆϵλ,t+τ) Explained by Vt and Lt
2003 2006 2009 2012 2016
0
20
40
60
80
100
Proportion explained by Vt
2003 2006 2009 2012 2016
0
20
40
60
80
100
Proportion explained by Lt
Notes: This ﬁgure plots the time series of FEVD for the jump intensity λt+τ at the horizon of 1 day. The
y-axis displays the proportion of the forecast error variance explained by the factors. The forecast error for
the jump intensity τ days ahead conditional on time t is deﬁned as eλ
t+τ = λτ−Et[λτ]. We decompose the
variance of the forecast error Var t
[
eλ
t+τ
]
into components associated with shocks to the illiquidity factor Lt
(bottom panel), and the spot variance Vt (top panel). The contribution of the latent state variable Ψ t in
the variance eλ
t+τ is very small and for brevity, is not reported here. All model parameters and ﬁltered state
variables are taken from the SJVI model estimates in Table 3.
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure 7: Alternative Illiquidity Measures
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Aggregte Effective Spread (S&P500): ILQt
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Effective Spread of E-mini Futures: E-mini ILQt
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Amihud Illiquidity Measure: Amihud ILQt
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
5
10
15
20
Filtered Jump Intensity: ILQt
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
5
10
15
20
Filtered Jump Intensity: E-mini ILQt
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
0
5
10
15
20
Filtered Jump Intensity: Amihud ILQt
Notes: We plot daily time-series of three market illiquidity measures (left-column panels), and their corre-
sponding ﬁltered jump intensities (right-column panels) implied by the SJVI model. The sample period is from
November 1, 2004 to April 26, 2016. Market illiquidity and jump intensity levels are plotted in annualized
terms. The top two panels plot results for the aggregate eﬀective spread measure ILQt deﬁned in equation
(1), which is the main illiquidity measure used in the paper. The bottom four panels plot results for the two
alternative illiquidity measures that we use in our robustness check. The middle two panels plot results for
the illiquidity measure that is calculate using eﬀective spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures, E-mini ILQt. In
the bottom panel, we plot results obtained using the Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, Amihud ILQt. We

ty measure that is calculate using eﬀective spreads of S&P500 E-mini futures, E-mini ILQt. In
the bottom panel, we plot results obtained using the Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, Amihud ILQt. We
normalize the two alternative illiquidity measures to have the same in-sample mean as the ILQt measures
that is calculated using aggregate eﬀective spreads of S&P 500 ﬁrms.
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Appendix
A Risk-Neutral Skewness
We use the model-free methodology implemented by Bakshi and Madan (2000) and Kozhan,
Neuberger, and Schneider (2014), among others, to compute risk-neutral skewness. A key
insight of this approach is that one can replicate any desired payoﬀ by designing a portfolio
of OTM European call and put options over a continuum of strike prices.
For an overview of this approach, let S denote the underlying asset value and let G[S]
denote the payoﬀ at maturity τ for a generic contingent claim written on S. By discounting
the contingent claim with the risk-free rater, its price can be evaluated under the risk-neutral
expectation as EQ
t{e−rτG[S]}. Bakshi and Madan (2000) show that for any twice-continuously
diﬀerentiable payoﬀ functionG[S] with bounded expectation, the price of this contingent claim
contract can be spanned according to the formula
EQ
t{e−rτG[S]} = e−rτ (G[S]−SGS[S]) +GS[S]St +
∫ ∞
S
GSS[K]C(t,τ ;K)dK
+
∫ S
0
GSS[K]P (t,τ ;K)dK, (21)
whereGs[S] and Gss[K] represent the ﬁrst and second derivatives of the payoﬀ function G
evaluated at some asset value S and at the strike price K, respectively. The above equation
shows that the contingent claim price can be replicated using a portfolio consisting of a risk-
free bond, an underlying asset, and OTM calls and puts. The integrals in equation (21) can
be evaluated numerically. We use a cubic spline method to calculate the integrals across
moneyness.

a risk-
free bond, an underlying asset, and OTM calls and puts. The integrals in equation (21) can
be evaluated numerically. We use a cubic spline method to calculate the integrals across
moneyness.
To construct higher risk-neutral moments, we focus on the payoﬀ function G with power
contracts. That is,
G[S] =
{ r2
t,τ the volatility contract
r3
t,τ the cubic contract, (22)
where rt,τ denotes the log-return of asset price S from time t to t +τ. The risk-neutral
volatility and skewness are then computed as
Vol Q
t,τ ={EQ
t [(rt,τ− EQ
t [rt,τ])2]}1/2, (23)
Skew Q
t,τ = EQ
t [(rt,τ− EQ
t [rt,τ])3]
{EQ
t [(rt,τ− EQ
t [rt,τ])2]}3/2. (24)
We obtain data on S&P 500 index options between 2003 and 2016 from OptionMetrics. We use
the average of the bid and ask quotes for each option contract and ﬁlter out options with bids
of $0 as well as those whose average quotes are less than $3 /8. We also ﬁlter out quotes that
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

do not satisfy standard no-arbitrage conditions. Finally, we eliminate in-the-money options
because they are less liquid than OTM and ATM options. We only estimate the moments
for days that have at least two OTM call prices and two OTM put prices available. Finally,
for our maturity of interest, i.e., 30-day, we implement a linear interpolation to calculate the
corresponding risk-neutral moments.
B High Frequency Spot Variance
Following Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015b), we construct a consistent estimator of spot
variance at the end of each trading day using the one-minute grid of S&P 500 futures returns
as follows:
ˆV (n,mn)
t = n
mn
n∑
i=n−mn+1
(ri,t)2I(|ri,t|≤ αn−ω). (25)
We use one-minute-grid returns over 6.5 hours in a trading day, thus resulting in n = 390
observations. The value of mn is set to be 75% of n for each day. Other tuning parameters
are set as follows: α = 4√BPVt and ω = 0.49 where BPV denotes the bi-power variation of
dayt computed using full one-minute grid of returns.
C Coeﬃcients in the Aﬃne Characteristic Function
The model that we study is casted in aﬃne framework so that the conditional characteristic
function is exponential aﬃne in the state variables following Duﬃe, Pan, and Singleton (2000).
Its functional form is given by
Et[exp(iφ log(ST ))] = exp ( α(τ) +β0(τ) log(St) +β1(τ)Vt +β2(τ)Lt +β3(τ)Ψt) (26)
We use the notation τ =T−t for simplicity. The coeﬃcients satisfy the following system of

functional form is given by
Et[exp(iφ log(ST ))] = exp ( α(τ) +β0(τ) log(St) +β1(τ)Vt +β2(τ)Lt +β3(τ)Ψt) (26)
We use the notation τ =T−t for simplicity. The coeﬃcients satisfy the following system of
Ricatti ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE) with the boundary conditions β0(0) = iφ and
α(0) =β1(0) =β2(0) =β3(0) = 0
51
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

dβ0
dτ = 0
dα
dτ = irφ + (κVθV +αLκLθL)β1 + (αVκVθV +κLθL)β2 +κΨθΨβ3
dβ1
dτ = 1
2ξ2
Vβ2
1 + (ξVρiφ +αVξ2
Vβ2−κV )β1 +
(1
2α2
Vξ2
Vβ2
2 +αV (ξVρiφ−κL)β2 + 1
2(iφ)2− (1
2 +αLξ)iφ +γVθu)
dβ2
dτ = 1
2ξ2
Lβ2
2 + (αLξ2
Lβ1−κL)β2 + (1
2α2
Lξ2
Lβ2
1−αLκLβ1−γlξiφ +γlθu)
dβ3
dτ = 1
2ξ2
Ψβ2
3−κΨβ3 +θu−ξiφ
where θu = (eθiφ+ 1
2δ2(iφ)2
− 1). Equations for β0 and β3 can be solved analytically in terms
of elementary functions while α, β1, and β2 need to be solved numerically. We employ a
fourth-order Runge-Kutta method with the step size of ∆ t = 1/252.
D Forecast Error Variance Decomposition
In the SJVI model, changes in jump intensity are driven by shocks to the spot illiquidity Lt,
the latent factor Ψt, and the spot variance Vt. Under the assumption of zero autocorrelation
in the three shocks, we can approximate the variance in the forecast error, eλ
t+τ, as:
Vart[eλ
t+τ]≈ Vart[eΨ
t+τ] + [γV γL] Vart
[
eV
t+τ
eL
t+τ
][γVγL
]
(27)
whereeΨ
t+τ,eV
t+τ, andeL
t+τ correspond to the shock associated with the three factors Ψt,Vt, and
Lt, respectively. After tedious algebra, we can compute the decomposition of forecast error
variance explained by each factor in closed-form. Speciﬁcally, the proportion of Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
explained by Vt is
θV ∆t
{∑τ−1
j=0γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
ξ2
V αVξ2
V
αVξ2
V α2
Vξ2
V
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL
}
+∆t (Vt−θV )∑τ−1
j=0



(
e′
1Φτ−j−1
VL e1
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
ξ2
V αVξ2
V
αVξ2
V α2
Vξ2
V
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL
+
(
e′
2Φτ−j−1
VL e1
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
α2
Lξ2
L αLξ2
L
αLξ2
L ξ2
L
](
Φj
VL

Φj
VL
)′
γVL
}
+∆t (Vt−θV )∑τ−1
j=0



(
e′
1Φτ−j−1
VL e1
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
ξ2
V αVξ2
V
αVξ2
V α2
Vξ2
V
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL
+
(
e′
2Φτ−j−1
VL e1
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
α2
Lξ2
L αLξ2
L
αLξ2
L ξ2
L
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL



Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
and the proportion of Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
explained by Lt is
52
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

θL∆t
{∑τ−1
j=0γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
α2
Lξ2
L αLξ2
L
αLξ2
L ξ2
L
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL
}
+∆t (Lt−θL)∑τ−1
j=0



(
e′
1Φτ−j−1
VL e2
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
ξ2
V αVξ2
V
αVξ2
V α2
Vξ2
V
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL
+
(
e′
2Φτ−j−1
VL e2
)
γ′
VL Φj
VL
[
α2
Lξ2
L αLξ2
L
αLξ2
L ξ2
L
](
Φj
VL
)′
γVL



Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
and lastly the proportion of Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
explained by Ψt is
∆tξ2
Ψ
(
1−Φ2τ
Ψ
1−Φ2
Ψ
θΨ + Φτ−1
Ψ
1−θτ
Ψ
1−θΨ
(Ψt−θΨ)
)
Vart
[
eλ
t+τ
]
where we have used the following notation: γVL =
[γVγL
]
, ΦVL =
[
1−κP
V ∆t −αLκL∆t
−αVκP
V ∆t 1−κL∆t
]
,
ΦΨ = 1−κΨ∆t, e1 =
[1
0
]
, and e2 =
[0
1
]
.
53
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure A.1: Percentiles of Dollar Eﬀective Spread: S&P 500 Constituents
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14Dollar Effective Spread
5 Percentile 25 Percentile 50 Percentile 75 Percentile 95 Percentile
Notes: We plot the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of the daily eﬀective spreads
(in dollars) from the constituents of the S&P 500 index. For the majority of ﬁrms in the S&P
500 index, trades are executed with an eﬀective spread above one cent, which is the minimum
tick size in the NYSE. This ﬁnding holds throughout our sample period going from January
2, 2003 to December 30, 2016.
54
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Supplementary Internet Appendix to:
“Time-Varying Crash Risk Embedded in Index Options:
The Role of Stock Market Liquidity”
Peter Christoﬀersen Bruno Feunou Yoontae Jeon
Chayawat Ornthanalai
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

This document contains discussions and additional results that were left out of the main paper
due to space considerations. In this supplementary appendix, Section IA.1 and section IA.2
investigate the impact of market illiquidity on realized jump variation and realized skewness
instead of option-implied skewness. Section IA.3 estimates the risk premiums on our state
variables implied by the models by ﬁtting them to daily S&P500 index returns. Section IA.4
examines the in-sample option pricing ﬁts of the three models that we study. Section IA.5
examines the impact of shocks to the spot volatility and market illiquidity by looking at the
impulse response funcion. Finally, Section IA.6 analyzes the impact of circuit breakers on the
jump intensity dynamic.
IA.1 Realized Variance and Jump Variation
Following Barndorﬀ-Nielsen and Shephard (2004), we deﬁne daily realized jump variation,
RJV, as the component of total realized variance RV that is not explained by MinRV. On
each day, it is calculated as:
RJVt = max(RVt−MinRVt, 0). (IA.1)
We can think of RJV as a proxy for jump risk in daily index returns. The mean and standard
deviation of the MinRV measure over this period are 0.0171 and 0.0489, respectively. For
the RJV measure, the mean and standard deviation are 0.0029 and 0.0085. The daily index
return variance is thus mostly diﬀusive. 1
IA.1.1 Predicting Realized Jumps
This section provides preliminary evidence on the economic relationship between market illiq-

9 and 0.0085. The daily index
return variance is thus mostly diﬀusive. 1
IA.1.1 Predicting Realized Jumps
This section provides preliminary evidence on the economic relationship between market illiq-
uidity and jump risk. We estimate a predictive regression model on the realized jump variation
measure RJV. We examine three variables of interest and their various combinations, namely,
the market illiquidity measure ILQ, the diﬀusive quadratic variation measure MinRV , and
the option-implied volatility index VIX. The most general predictive regression speciﬁcation
is
RJVt+1 = β0 +β1MinRVt +β2ILQt +β3VIX t +β3Rett +β3RJVt +ϵt+1. (IA.2)
1This ﬁnding is consistent with Huang and Tauchen (2005) who ﬁnd that jumps account for 7% of stock
market price variance.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

We obtain daily VIX levels from the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE) calculated
as the 30-day implied volatility level of S&P500 index options. We include lagged log return
of the S&P 500 ( Ret) and the autoregressive term for RJV as control variables. Year and
day-of-the-week ﬁxed eﬀects are present in all regression speciﬁcations, but their estimates
are not reported here to save space.
Table IA.1 summarizes the regression results for six speciﬁcations based on the general
model described in equation (IA.2). We report the heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistic
(White, 1980) in parentheses below each parameter estimate. Columns (1)–(3) show that when
each of the three variables enters in the regression model, it appears statistically signiﬁcant
in predicting the realized jump variation the next day. We ﬁnd that MinRVt, ILQt, and
VIX t are positive and highly signiﬁcant at the 95% level or higher. These positive coeﬃcients
conﬁrm the intuition that jumps are more likely to occur following a day of volatile and illiquid
market conditions. Looking at the size of the coeﬃcients, we ﬁnd that market illiquidity, ILQ,
is the dominant variable. A one-standard-deviation increase in market illiquidity today would
increase realized jump variation by 7.8% the next day.
Columns (4)–(5) report results for combining market illiquidity and the two volatility
measures. The results show that ILQt is the dominant variable in predicting daily realized
jump variation.

t day.
Columns (4)–(5) report results for combining market illiquidity and the two volatility
measures. The results show that ILQt is the dominant variable in predicting daily realized
jump variation. When the market illiquidity measure ILQt is added to the regression, the
coeﬃcient on MinRVt loses statistical signiﬁcance while the coeﬃcient on VIX t still carries
statistical signiﬁcance at the 95% level. Column (6) reports results for the most general
speciﬁcation where all independent variables are included. We ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on
ILQt decreases by half due to inﬂuences of the two market variance measures. Nevertheless,
we ﬁnd that ILQt is the only variable that remains statistically signiﬁcant, conﬁrming that
it is the leading predictor of realized jump variation in the stock market. We emphasize that
the market illiquidity measure that we use is calculated from eﬀective spreads of 500 ﬁrms
constituting the S&P500 index while the dependent variable, RJV, is constructed from one-
minute log returns on the S&P500 cash index. Market illiquidity and realized return jump
variations are thus not mechanically related. Motivated by this model-free evidence, we now
develop a continuous-time model that allows market illiquidity to act as an economic covariate
in explaining time-varying volatility and crash risk.
IA.2 Realized Skewness Regression
We ﬁrst examine the impact of market illiquidity on the daily realized skewness measure,
RSkew.

onomic covariate
in explaining time-varying volatility and crash risk.
IA.2 Realized Skewness Regression
We ﬁrst examine the impact of market illiquidity on the daily realized skewness measure,
RSkew. Unlike risk-neutral skewness that represents a forward-looking measure of the stock
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

market crash risk, RSkew is calculated using historically observed high-frequency intraday
index returns. Therefore, a more negative daily realized skewness level would indicate an
increasing probability that a crash in the stock market has occurred during that trading day.
We estimate a time-series regression for the change in realized skewness, ∆ RSkewt+1,
similar to the general model shown in equation (7). However, we use a predictive regression
model for the change in realized skewness by lagging all independent variables by one day.
This is because RSkew is calculated from intraday trades observed during the day, which is
the same data period used for calculating MinRV and ILQ.2 This concern, however, does not
apply to the risk-neutral skewness regression because RNSkew is calculated using end-of-day
option prices and is derived from a diﬀerent data source.
We construct the daily realized skewness measure,RSkew, following the method in Amaya,
Christoﬀersen, Jacobs, and Vasques (2015), which has been shown to signiﬁcantly predict stock
returns. This realized skewness is calculated using one-minute log returns of the S&P500 cash
index as follows:
RSkewN
t =
√
N∑N
i=1r3
i,t
(RVN
t )3/2 , (IA.3)
where N is the number of time intervals in a trading day. As N goes to inﬁnity, the above
measure converges to the cubic variation of the jump component in the daily return, i.e., the
diﬀusive component is excluded in its measurement.

vals in a trading day. As N goes to inﬁnity, the above
measure converges to the cubic variation of the jump component in the daily return, i.e., the
diﬀusive component is excluded in its measurement.
Table IA.2 reports four sets of regression results on changes in daily realized skewness. We
use an ARMA model withp = 1 in the autoregressive term andq = 2 in the error term. These
lags are determined by the Ljung-Box test. The results shown in Table IA.2 strongly support
the ﬁndings in Table 2, which are obtained using daily changes in risk-neutral skewness. That
is, an increase in market illiquidity is negatively related to realized skewness. Column (2) shows
that the negative coeﬃcient on ∆ MinRV is negligible in magnitude as well as in statistical
signiﬁcance. However, when both ∆ MinRV and ∆ILQ are added to the regression model,
the coeﬃcient estimate on ∆ MinRV becomes positive and statistically signiﬁcant. These
ﬁndings are consistent with the results obtained in Table 2. Therefore, we ﬁnd the eﬀect
of market illiquidity on crash probability is robust to measuring the stock market crask risk
using forwarding-looking risk-neutral skewness or historical realized skewness.
2Our conclusion is unaﬀected when we use a contemporaneous regression instead of a predictive regression.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

IA.3 Risk Premiums
Using the risk-neutral parameter estimates in Table 3 and daily ﬁltered states variables
{ ˆVt, ˆLt, ˆΨt} estimated previously, we infer the risk premium parameters. This is done by esti-
mating the model on daily S&P500 index returns from 2004–2012, and keeping the parameters
that are not aﬀected by the change of probability measures ﬁxed. This approach to identify
risk premiums was also employed in Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2015b).
We assume the conventional form of the pricing kernel that preserves the aﬃne structure
of the model under the physical measure. The prices of risk associated with the four Brownian
motions are given by
dW 1,P
t = dW 1
t−ν1
√
Vtdt (IA.4)
dW 2,P
t = dW 2
t−νV
√
Vtdt (IA.5)
dW 3,P
t = dW 3
t (IA.6)
dW 4,P
t = dW 4
t (IA.7)
The parameterν1 in equation (IA.4) corresponds to the price of risk parameter for the ﬁrst
Brownian innovation in the return process. Recall thatνV is the price of risk parameter for the
volatility innovation that we estimated from options and realized spot variance as part of the
UKF. Its estimate is reported in Table 3. Recall also that we do not impose any risk premium
assumptions on the third and fourth Brownian motions corresponding to the illiquidity and
latent jump intensity innovations, respectively.
We follow Pan (2002) and assume the diﬀerence between jump distributions under the
physical and risk-neutral measures derives from the jump-size risk premium, νθ, deﬁned as

innovations, respectively.
We follow Pan (2002) and assume the diﬀerence between jump distributions under the
physical and risk-neutral measures derives from the jump-size risk premium, νθ, deﬁned as
the diﬀerence between jump-size means, θP−θ. The dynamic of the log-stock price under the
physical probability measure can be written as
d log(St) = ( r− 1
2Vt−µPλt + (
√
1−ρ2ν1 +ρνv)Vt + (µP−µ)λt)dt +
√
Vt(
√
1−ρ2dW 1,P
t +ρdW 2,P
t ) +qtdN P
t (IA.8)
whereµP = exp(θP + 1
2δ2)−1 is the jump compensator under the physical measure. Comparing
the P-measure return dynamic in equation (IA.8) to theQ-measure return dynamic in equation
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

(8) shows that the equity risk premium, πt, can be written as
πt = ( µP−µ)λt + (
√
1−ρ2ν1 +ρνV )Vt (IA.9)
= ( µP−µ)λt +νSVt, (IA.10)
where we deﬁne νS =
√
1−ρ2ν1 +ρνv in equation (IA.10).
Using the ﬁltered state variables, { ˆVt, ˆLt, ˆΨt}, we apply daily discretization to the return
process and estimate the risk premium parameters νθ andνS using MLE while ﬁxing all other
parameters. The estimate for ν1 is then inferred from νS.
Daily discretization of the physical return process yields
rt+1≃ (r + (νS− 1
2) ˆVt−µ ˆλt)∆t +
√
ˆVt
√
∆tϵt +
Nt∑
i=1
yi,t, (IA.11)
whereνS =
√
1−ρ2ν1 +ρνv, and ϵt is the standard normal innovation. The jump component
is represented by a compound Poisson process ∑Nt
i=1yi,t, where Nt is the number of jump
arrivals with intensity λt on day t, and yi,t is i.i.d. normal with mean θP and variance δ2.
Conditional on the number of jumps Nt = j, we can write the likelihood as conditionally
normal, thus, the daily return likelihood can be computed analytically.
Table IA.3 reports estimation results of the risk premium parameters. Because we let
the risk-neutral parameters and ﬁltered states be ﬁxed during the estimation procedure, we
do not report the associated t-statistics as they are not meaningful. Using the estimates
reported in Table IA.3 and Table 2, we quantify the economic magnitude of each risk premium
component in terms of annualized excess returns. Equation (IA.10) shows that the equity risk
premium can be decomposed into two main components.

we quantify the economic magnitude of each risk premium
component in terms of annualized excess returns. Equation (IA.10) shows that the equity risk
premium can be decomposed into two main components. The ﬁrst component represents
the compensation for bearing stock market crash risk, ( µP−µ)λt. The second component
represents the compensation for bearing stock market diﬀusive return risk and variance risks,
νSVt. For brevity, we refer to νSVt as diﬀusive risk in the equity risk premium.
We ﬁrst look at the compensation for bearing stock market diﬀusive risk. This is calculated
as νS ¯V , where ¯V is the time-series mean of the annualized variance reported in Table 4. We
estimate the compensation for bearing diﬀusive risk for the SJ, SJV, and SJVI model to be
10.64%, 6.87%, and 6.66% in annualized excess returns, respectively.
We next look at the compensation for bearing stock market crash risk. For each model,
we calculate the long-run jump risk premium level (µP−µ)¯λ, where ¯λ is the annualized time-
series mean of the jump intensity dynamic reported in Table 4. We estimate the compensation
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

for bearing market crash risk for the SJ, SJV, and SJVI models to be 2 .6%, 2.4%, and 3.1%
in annualized excess returns, respectively. The jump risk premium estimates implied by the
models are consistent with prior studies that estimate a time-varying jump risk model on the
S&P500 index. For instance, Ornthanalai (2014) estimates the jump risk premium implied by
the compound Poisson jump process over the 1996–2012 period and ﬁnds that its magnitude
is 4.5% per year. Using index options and returns data from 1989–1996, Pan (2002) ﬁnds that
the implied jump risk premium is 3 .5% per annum.
IA.4 Option Fit
We compare the performance of the SJ, SJV, and SJVI models that we study based on their
in-sample option ﬁt. We deﬁne in-sample option pricing error as the vega-weighted root mean
squared error (VWRMSE)
VWRMSE(ATM) =
√ 1
T
T∑
t=1
(ATM O
t+1− ¯ATM
M
t+1)2, (IA.12)
where ¯ATM
M
t+1 denotes the forecast of the vega-weighted ATM option price at time t + 1.
Option pricing errors for OTM options are computed in a similar way.
Table IA.4 reports in-sample option pricing errors for the three models. We separate the
sample into three sub-periods of three years each. We ﬁnd that pricing errors are very similar
in magnitude between SJV and SJVI models, where the SJV model performs better during the
crisis period while the SJVI model has lower pricing errors during normal times. An important
remark is in order regarding the similar option pricing ﬁt between the SJV and SJVI models.

er during the
crisis period while the SJVI model has lower pricing errors during normal times. An important
remark is in order regarding the similar option pricing ﬁt between the SJV and SJVI models.
The loss function used in the estimation procedure is not the option pricing error such as the
VWRMSE metric. This is because the objective of our estimation is not to minimize option
pricing errors, but rather to extract and the latent jump and volatility dynamics from option
prices and linking them to observable covariates (i.e., market illiquidity). As a result, the
similarity in the pricing errors between the SJV and SJVI models should be interpreted as an
evidence that adding illiquidity as an observable variable can explain the latent jump intensity
process while preserving a comparable option pricing ﬁt.
Table IA.4 shows that the SJ model exhibits large pricing errors in all periods relative to
the other two models. Thus, the improvement in ﬁtting observed option prices, particularly
during calm periods, using the SJVI model suggests that its jump intensity speciﬁcation is
well-suited for capturing the jump intensity dynamic embedded in the index options.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

IA.5 Impulse Response Function
We examine the impact of market illiquidity on the current and future crash probability using
impulse response functions (IRFs). The IRF tells how much the current and future crash
intensityλt+τ respond to a one-standard-deviation increase in either the spot variance Vt, the
spot market illiquidity Lt, or the level of latent state variable Ψ t.
The SJVI model that we propose yields an analytically tractable IRF for the jump intensity.
We start by expanding the discretized state-space system in equations 12–14, and rewrite it
in terms of past innovation terms only. This results in the following system of equations:
[Vt+1
Lt+1
]
=
[θV
θL
]
+
∞∑
j=0
[
1−κP
V ∆t −αLκL∆t
−αVκP
V ∆t 1−κL∆t
]j[ 1 αL
αV 1
][ηV
t+1−j
ηL
t+1−j
]
(IA.13)
Ψt+1 = θΨ +
∞∑
j=0
(1−κΨ∆t)jηΨ
t+1−j, (IA.14)
where ηV
t+1 =ξV
√
∆t√Vtϵ1
t+1, ηL
t+1 =ξL
√
∆t√Ltϵ2
t+1, and ηΨ
t+1 =ξΨ
√
∆t√Ψtϵ3
t+1.
Plugging the expansions shown in equations (IA.13)–(IA.14) into the jump intensity dy-
namic, λt+1 = Ψt+1 +γVVt+1 +γLLt+1, we can express λt+1 only in terms of shocks to the
system as
λt+1 = θΨ +γVθV +γLθL + (IA.15)
∞∑
j=0
[γV γL]
[
1−κP
V ∆t −αLκL∆t
−αVκP
V ∆t 1−κL∆t
]j[ 1 αL
αV 1
][ηV
t+1−j
ηL
t+1−j
]
+
∞∑
j=0
(1−κΨ∆t)jηΨ
t+1−j,
whereηV
t+1−j,ηL
t+1−j, andηΨ
t+1−j represent shocks speciﬁc to the variance, illiquidity, and latent
factors, respectively. Thus, the impulse response of a speciﬁc shock for τ periods ahead can

1−j,
whereηV
t+1−j,ηL
t+1−j, andηΨ
t+1−j represent shocks speciﬁc to the variance, illiquidity, and latent
factors, respectively. Thus, the impulse response of a speciﬁc shock for τ periods ahead can
be calculated by simply setting j =τ in the coeﬃcient associated with that speciﬁc shock in
equation (IA.15).
In Figure IA.1, we consider two dates where the level of spot volatility is relatively high
or low. The left-hand-side panels plot the IRF on March 11, 2009, with high spot volatility.
The right-hand-side panels plot the IRF on January 8, 2004, with a low spot volatility.
Looking at the IRF plots on the day with high volatility (left panels), we ﬁnd that the
impact of spot volatility dominates. A one-standard-deviation increase in the spot volatility
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Vt translates to an increase of 0.11 in jump intensity on the same day. Importantly, the
impact of a shock to spot volatility is very persistent with a half life of about two months. A
one-standard-deviation increase in the market spot illiquidity Lt increases the jump intensity
by about 0.07. Looking at the impact of a shock to the latent factor Ψ t, we ﬁnd that it is
trivially small at both the short and long horizons.
We next look at the IRF plots on the day with low spot volatility. The state variables on
this day are signiﬁcantly less volatile and therefore the levels of IRF are much lower. On this
low-volatility day, Figure IA.1 shows that a shock to market illiquidity dominates in term of
magnitude as well as its lasting impact on the jump intensity. Similar to the day with high
spot volatility, we ﬁnd that the impact of a one-standard-deviation shock to the latent factor
Ψt is small. Overall, Figure IA.1 shows that shocks to the spot volatility Vt and the market
illiquidity Lt are highly persistent and drive most of the current and future increase in the
probability of crash risk. However, the relative importance of Vt and Lt depends on the level
of uncertainty in the market.
IA.6 Circuit Breakers
Following the ﬂash crash incident on May 6, 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) installed “circuit breakers” on 404 NYSE-listed S&P 500 stocks on June 16, 2010 to
halt trading for ﬁve minutes if any stock experiences more than 10% movement, either up

nd Exchange Commission
(SEC) installed “circuit breakers” on 404 NYSE-listed S&P 500 stocks on June 16, 2010 to
halt trading for ﬁve minutes if any stock experiences more than 10% movement, either up
or down, in a ﬁve-minute period. This new trading rule potentially aﬀects our aggregate
illiquidity measure constructed from individual ﬁrms’ eﬀective spreads, thereby altering the
impact of market illiquidity on jump probability. We test whether this change in market-
trading rules alters our ﬁndings on the inﬂuence of market illiquidity on time-varying crash
risk.
We take June 16, 2010 as the date of the exogenous shift in the market-trading structure.
Speciﬁcally, we divide our sample into two periods, one starting on January 2, 2003 and ending
on June 15, 2010, and the other starting on June 16, 2010 and ending on April 26, 2016. We
use the same jump intensity speciﬁcation as in the SJVI model for both subsamples, as below.
The model parameters are estimated separately, yielding two sets of estimates. We summarize
the results below. For brevity, we report only coeﬃcient loadings on the covariates in the jump
intensity dynamic. The t-statistic for each parameter is reported in parentheses underneath
its estimate.3
3***, **, and * denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1, 5, and 10 conﬁdence levels, respectively.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Before the circuit breaker: λt = Ψt+ 19.74Vt+ 9.55Lt (IA.15)
(8.92)∗∗∗ (6.00)∗∗∗
After the circuit breaker: λt = Ψt+ 12.80Vt+ 11.74Lt. (IA.16)
(1.60) (3 .40)∗∗∗
We ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on the market illiquidity factor is larger in latter period, namely
11.74, relative to the estimate of 9.55 in the earlier period. This suggests that the introduction
of circuit breakers has not signiﬁcantly changed the impact of market illiquidity on jump
intensity. Hence, equations (IA.15)–(IA.16) show that the implementation of circuit breakers
does not materially impact the importance of the market illiquidity channel. Both coeﬃcients
are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level, with a lower t-statistic for the latter period likely
because of its much smaller sample size. The coeﬃcients on the market spot variance Vt for
the pre- and post-circuit breaker periods are 19.74 and 12.80, respectively. These magnitudes
are similar to the estimate of 14 .88 found using the full sample period. In the post circuit
breaker periods, the impact of Vt is statistically weak, but the sample size is much smaller as
well. These results therefore conﬁrm the robustness of our estimates in Table 3.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table IA.1: Regression Models for Realized Jump Variation (RJV)
Next Day Realized Jump Variation: RJVt+1
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
MinRVt 0.068*** 0.041 0.039
(2.68) (1.57) (1.45)
ILQt 0.078*** 0.050*** 0.051** 0.032**
(3.97) (4.26) (2.29) (2.20)
VIX t 0.042*** 0.019** 0.014
(4.71) (2.50) (1.60)
Rett -0.049 -0.051 -0.032 -0.046 -0.041 -0.039
(-1.02) (-1.02) (-0.66) (-0.97) (-0.81) (-0.80)
RJVt -0.175 -0.046 0.004 -0.169 -0.042 -0.159
(-1.13) (-0.62) (0.07) (-1.18) (-0.59) (-1.11)
Adjusted R2 29.6% 29.9% 29.1% 31.9% 30.4% 32.2%
Notes: We report estimated coeﬃcients and t-statistics from predictive OLS regressions on
realized jump variation in daily S&P500 index returns. The sample period is from January
2, 2003 to December 30, 2016. The dependent variable is the realized jump variation ( RJV )
calculated using high-frequency intraday trades on S&P 500 cash index. The independent
variables include lagged realized variance estimator, MinRV, from Andersen, Dobrev, and
Schaumburg (2012), which measures variations in daily S&P500 index returns that are as-
sociated with diﬀusive risk; the market illiquidity proxy, ILQ, measured by daily averaged
eﬀective spreads across ﬁrms in the S&P500 constituents; the option-implied volatility index,
VIX, obtained from the CBOE; and the log return of S&P500 index. All variables are lagged
by one day. RJV, MinRV, ES, and VIX are expressed in annualized terms by multiplying their
daily measure by 252.

X, obtained from the CBOE; and the log return of S&P500 index. All variables are lagged
by one day. RJV, MinRV, ES, and VIX are expressed in annualized terms by multiplying their
daily measure by 252. We also include the autoregressive term for RJV in the regression. Year
and day-of-the week ﬁxed eﬀects are included. Coeﬃcient estimates on the ﬁxed-eﬀect terms
are not reported here to save space. We report heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistic in
parenthesis below each parameter estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively, based on heterosedasticity-consistent
t-statistics. Adjusted R-squared for each regression model is reported in the bottom row.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table IA.2: ARMA Models for Changes in Realized Skewness
∆RSkewt+1
(1) (2) (3) (4)
∆MinRVt -0.050 0.364**
(-0.35) (2.06)
∆ILQt -0.324*** -0.690***
(-3.01) (-3.36)
Returnt 0.276 0.038 -0.019 -0.057
(0.61) (0.95) (-0.61) (-1.56)
∆RSkewt 0.919*** 0.865*** 0.870*** 0.864***
(19.13) (20.61) (130.74) (148.93)
R2 52.6% 52.9% 53.0% 53.1%
Notes: We report regression results on daily changes in realized skewness of S&P500 index returns, ∆RSkewt+1.
The sample period is from January 2, 2003 to December 30, 2016. The daily realized skewness measure,RSkew,
on each trading day is constructed from high-frequency data following the method in Amaya, Christoﬀersen,
Jacobs, and Vasquez (2015). The independent variables include lagged change in realized variance estimator,
∆MinRV , from Andersen, Dobrev, and Schaumburg (2012); change in market illiquidity proxy; ∆ILQ, mea-
sured by daily averaged eﬀective spreads across ﬁrms in the S&P 500 constituents;Return, log S&P 500 return.
We lag all independent variables by one day because the daily realized skewness measure is calculated from
intraday trades observed over each day, which overlap with the data period used for constructing the indepen-
dent variables. Each speciﬁcation is estimated using maximum likelihood. We use an ARMA(1,2) structure
in the regression model, which is determined by the LjungBox test to suﬃciently remove cross-correlations in
the residuals. We control for seasonality due to the day-of-the-week eﬀect.

(1,2) structure
in the regression model, which is determined by the LjungBox test to suﬃciently remove cross-correlations in
the residuals. We control for seasonality due to the day-of-the-week eﬀect. We report coeﬃcient estimates
on the autoregressive term. We do not report coeﬃcient estimates on the moving-average error term and
day-of-the-week ﬁxed eﬀects for brevity. Robust t-statistics are reported in parenthesis below each parameter
estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively.
The last row reports regression diagnostics based on the R2 metric.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table IA.3: Risk Premium Parameters Estimated from Daily Returns: 2003–2016
(1) SJ Model (2) SJV Model (3) SJVI Model
λt = Ψt λt = Ψt +γVVt λt = Ψt+γVVt+γLLt
Parameter Estimate Estimate Estimate
νs =
√
1−ρ2ν1+ρνv 4.648 2.464 2.412
νθ 0.033 0.012 0.013
ν1 5.350 1.728 1.686
Log-Likelihood: 10,121.48 10,250.19 10,297.44
Notes: We report MLE estimates of the risk premium parameters for the three time-varying jump models: SJ,
SJV, and SJVI. Each model is ﬁtted to daily S&P500 returns data from January 2, 2003 to April 26, 2016.
We obtain daily state values Vt,Lt, and Ψt, as well as Q-measure parameters from the ﬁrst-stage estimation
results reported in Table 3. The parameterνθ is the diﬀerence between jump-size means under the physical and
risk-neutral measures, i.e.,θP−θ. The parameter ν1 corresponds to the price of risk coeﬃcient associated with
the Brownian innovation in the return process; see equation (IA.4). To facilitate econometric identiﬁcation,
we estimateνs =
√
1−ρ2ν1 +ρνV from daily returns using MLE and later infer ν1 from its estimate together
with the value of νV reported in Table 3.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table IA.4: Vega-weighted Root Mean Squared Errors from Diﬀerent Models
(1) SJ Model (2) SJV Model (3) SJVI Model
λt = Ψt λt = Ψt +γVVt λt = Ψt+γVVt+γLLt
Panel A. VWRMSE by sub-period for OTM options
2003–2006 2.32% 2.37% 2.12%
2007–2011 6.60% 3.45% 3.74%
2012–2016 3.09% 3.27% 3.06%
2003–2016 4.65% 3.09% 3.11%
Panel B. VWRMSE by sub-period for ATM options
2003–2006 1.57% 1.48% 1.01%
2007–2011 6.45% 2.78% 2.67%
2012–2016 1.37% 1.83% 1.46%
2003–2016 4.23% 2.17% 1.94%
Notes: We report in-sample ﬁt for the three models: SJ, SJV, and SJVI. The models are estimated
using MLE. Equation (19) shows the log likelihood function. Panel A reports in-sample option
pricing errors for OTM and panel B reports the pricing errors for ATM options. Option pricing
errors are obtained from the measurement equations in the UKF step. The numbers reported are
vega-weighted root mean squared error (VWRMSE). For ATM options, the VWRMSE is calculated
as
VWRMSE(ATM) =
√ 1
T
T∑
t=1
(
ATMO
t+1− ¯ATMM
t+1
)2
where ¯ATMM
t+1 denotes the forecast of vega-weighted ATM option price at time t + 1, andATMO
t+1
denotes the vega-weighted ATM option price observed in the data. We use option vega reported in the
Ivey Optionmetrics database to scale option prices, which makes their levels more comparable across
moneyness and time (Trolle and Schwartz, 2009). The VWRMSE for OTM options is calculated the
same way.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Table IA.5: Vega-weighted Root-Mean-Squared Errors from Diﬀerent Illiquidity Measures
(1) E-mini futures (2) Amihud measure (3) Agg. S&P 500
E-miniILQt AmihudILQt ILQt
Panel A. VWRMSE by sub-period for OTM options
2004–2006 2.38% 2.47% 2.35%
2007–2011 3.82% 3.72% 3.74%
2012–2016 3.18% 3.79% 3.06%
2004–2016 3.36% 3.51% 3.28%
Panel B. VWRMSE by sub-period for ATM options
2004–2006 0.93% 1.10% 0.96%
2007–2011 2.49% 2.94% 2.67%
2012–2016 1.70% 2.38% 1.46%
2004–2016 2.00% 2.46% 2.05%
Notes: We report in-sample ﬁt for the three diﬀerent illiquidity measures: (1) Eﬀective spreads of S&P E-mini
futures, (2) Amihud’s (2002) measure, and (3) Aggregated eﬀective spreads of S&P500 stocks. The models
are estimated using MLE. Equation (26) shows the log likelihood function. Panel A reports in-sample option
pricing errors for OTM and panel B reports the pricing errors for ATM options. Option pricing errors are
obtained from the measurement equations in the UKF step. The numbers reported are vega-weighted root
mean squared error (VWRMSE). For ATM options, the VWRMSE is calculated as
VWRMSE(ATM) =
√ 1
T
T∑
t=1
(
ATMO
t+1− ¯ATM
M
t+1
)2
where ¯ATM
M
t+1 denotes the ex ante forecast of vega-weighted ATM option price at time t + 1, and ATMO
t+1
denotes the vega-weighted ATM option price observed in the data. We use option vega reported in the Ivey
Optionmetrics database to scale option prices, which makes their levels more comparable across moneyness
and time (Trolle and Schwartz, 2009).

rved in the data. We use option vega reported in the Ivey
Optionmetrics database to scale option prices, which makes their levels more comparable across moneyness
and time (Trolle and Schwartz, 2009). The VWRMSE for OTM options is calculated similarly.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308

Figure IA.1: Impulse Response Function of λτ: High vs. Low Volatility Days
0 50 100 150 200 250
Impulse Response
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
High volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Vt
0 50 100 150 200 250
Impulse Response0
0.05
0.1
0.15
High volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Lt
0 50 100 150 200 250
Impulse Response
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
High volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Ψ t
0 50 100 150 200 250
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Low volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Vt
0 50 100 150 200 250
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Low volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Lt
0 50 100 150 200 250
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Low volatility
One-standard deviation shock to Ψ t
Notes: This ﬁgure plots the impulse response function (IRF) describing the impact of one-standard-deviation
shock to Vt, Lt, and Ψt on the jump intensity λt+τ in the τ days ahead. The x-axis displays the horizon τ in
number of days and the y-axis corresponds to the response of λt+τ. We plot the IRF from two days where the
spot volatility levels are relatively high (left-column panels) and low (right-column panels). In each column,
the top, middle, and bottom panels plot the IRF examining the impact of shocks to the spot volatility, spot
illiquidity, and the latent state variable, respectively. All model parameters and ﬁltered state variables are
taken from the SJVI model estimates in Table 2. The date with high spot volatility (26 .9%) corresponds to
March 11, 2009.

variable, respectively. All model parameters and ﬁltered state variables are
taken from the SJVI model estimates in Table 2. The date with high spot volatility (26 .9%) corresponds to
March 11, 2009. The date with log spot volatility (9 .2%) corresponds to January 8, 2004.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797308
