Financial Markets and Portfolio Management (2023) 37:95–114
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11408-022-00417-8
Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh
and Titman’s seminal paper?
Tobias Wiest 1
Accepted: 20 June 2022 / Published online: 2 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
For over 30 years, extensive research has found corroborating evidence that past win-
ners continue to yield higher returns than past losers. This momentum effect is robust
across various asset classes and across the globe and presents perhaps the most perva-
sive contradiction of the efﬁcient market hypothesis. This article reviews three strands
of literature on momentum. First, I outline the construction of momentum strategies,
emphasizing improvements and alternatives such as time-series momentum, residual
momentum, and risk-managed momentum. Second, I summarize the most prominent
behavioral-based and risk-based explanations for the origin of momentum. Finally, I
present in detail the ﬁndings on commonality in stock momentum, namely on industry
and factor momentum.
Keywords Momentum · Asset pricing · Factor momentum · Industry momentum ·
Commonalities · Residual momentum · Behavioral ﬁnance
JEL Classiﬁcation G11 · G12 · G40
1 Introduction: momentum everywhere
In their seminal paper, Jegadeesh and Titman ( 1993) highlight that equity trading
strategies that buy past winners and sell past losers yield positive returns. The exis-

duction: momentum everywhere
In their seminal paper, Jegadeesh and Titman ( 1993) highlight that equity trading
strategies that buy past winners and sell past losers yield positive returns. The exis-
tence of momentum, a continuation of (relative) performance of the past into the future,
has had a profound impact both on the investment and on the academic landscape. For
investors, momentum presents a robust, variable, and proﬁtable investment strategy
that has found widespread implementation by active mutual funds, hedge funds, and
passive ETFs. For ﬁnancial research, momentum presents a striking contradiction to
B Tobias Wiest
tobias.wiest@unisg.ch
1 Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance, University of St. Gallen, Unterer Graben 21, 9000 St. Gallen,
Switzerland
123

96 T. Wiest
the weak form efﬁcient market hypothesis of Fama ( 1970). As depicted in Fig. 1,t h e
contradiction is exacerbated by a myriad of studies that ﬁnd momentum in a vast num-
ber of asset classes other than stocks and in various geographical regions. Rouwenhorst
(1998) applies the approach of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) to 12 European countries
and ﬁnds stock momentum in a similar magnitude as in the USA. Carhart ( 1997) ﬁnds
persistence in relative mutual fund performance. A momentum strategy going long
in funds with the best performance and short in funds with the worst performance
over the previous year yields a monthly return of 0.67%. Positive momentum effects
have also been found in commodity futures (Miffre and Rallis 2007), in corporate
bonds (Jostova et al. 2013), and most recently in cryptocurrencies (Liu et al. 2022).
Asness et al. ( 2013) further highlight that momentum is everywhere by construct-
ing proﬁtable momentum strategies for US equities, UK equities, European equities,
government bonds, currencies, and commodity futures.
This literature review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of momentum by
summarizing the highest quality research on the topic. Forty-seven out of the 60 cited
papers have been published in theJournal of Finance,t h eReview of Financial Studies,
or the Journal of Financial Economics.
First, I outline the general cross-sectional momentum strategy of Jegadeesh and

s have been published in theJournal of Finance,t h eReview of Financial Studies,
or the Journal of Financial Economics.
First, I outline the general cross-sectional momentum strategy of Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) and highlight the potential sources of returns of such strategies using
the return composition of Lewellen ( 2002). These include positive autocorrelation in
stock returns, negative cross-correlation, and dispersion in stocks’ expected returns.
Further, I list several alternative construction methods that improve momentum proﬁts.
Moskowitz et al. ( 2012) propose a time-series momentum strategy that is a pure bet
on assets’ own return continuation rather than relative performance. In what they call
residual momentum, Blitz et al. ( 2011) ﬁnd that adjusting raw returns by their risk
factor exposure enhances momentum proﬁts. Novy-Marx ( 2012) boosts momentum
proﬁts by setting the look-back period to an intermediate horizon, and Daniel and
Moskowitz (2016) do so by scaling the position in momentum by its ex ante inverse
volatility.
Second, I summarize two strands of literature that examine the origin of momentum
proﬁts: behavioral-based explanations and risk-based explanations. Behavior-based
explanations assume that ﬁrm-speciﬁc momentum stems from biases or irrationality
in investors. Early studies propose models in which serial correlation in stock returns is
driven either by a delayed overreaction to news (Daniel et al. 1998), initial underreac-

es or irrationality
in investors. Early studies propose models in which serial correlation in stock returns is
driven either by a delayed overreaction to news (Daniel et al. 1998), initial underreac-
tion (Barberis et al. 1998), or both (Hong and Stein 1999). George and Hwang (2004)
and Grinblatt and Han ( 2005) argue that anchoring biases and a disposition effect are
responsible for momentum effects. Risk-based explanations seek to unify momentum,
the efﬁcient market hypothesis, and risk-based asset pricing models. There are two
ways for a momentum strategy to be risky. First, past outperformance of winners was
due to higher risk exposure, which is persistent in the future. Second, winners have
gotten riskier due to their past outperformance. Johnson (2002) and Sagi and Seasholes
(2007) argue for the second channel by highlighting an increase in growth rate risk
after a positive performance.
Lastly, I present the more recent literature studying the co-movement of momentum
effects in individual assets. Models explaining momentum with uncorrelated ﬁrm-
speciﬁc effects miss that due to diversiﬁcation, such momentum would present a near-
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 97
012345
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
t-statistic
Average monthly return (%)
0.95
0.41
0.880.85
0.67
1.22
0.59
U.S. Equity (Jegadeesh, 1993)
U.S. Equity (French, 2022)
European Equity (French, 2022)
AP ex. JP Equity (French, 2022)
Mutual Funds (Carhart, 1997)
Commodity Futures (Miﬀre, 2007)
Corporate Bonds (Jostova, 2013)
Fig. 1 Average monthly momentum proﬁts across regions and asset classes. This ﬁgure depicts average
monthly returns and t-statistics of momentum strategies reported by previous studies or calculated from data
provided by Kenneth French. The studies’ sample periods are as follows: Jegadeesh and Titman ( 1993):
January 1965–December 1989, Carhart ( 1997): January 1963–December 1993, Miffre and Rallis ( 2007):
March 1979–July 1985, Jostova et al. ( 2013): January 1973–June 2011, and Liu et al. ( 2022): January
2014–July 2020. The data from Kenneth French’s website are obtained for the period from November 1990
to December 2021
arbitrage opportunity and would likely not have persisted over decades. Moskowitz
and Grinblatt ( 1999) construct a proﬁtable industry momentum strategy that is not
only proﬁtable both in the short and intermediate term but largely explains stock
momentum. They also document that the serial correlation in monthly industry returns
is strongest in the ﬁrst order. More recently, Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) argue for

term but largely explains stock
momentum. They also document that the serial correlation in monthly industry returns
is strongest in the ﬁrst order. More recently, Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) argue for
multiple independent forms of industry momentum after ﬁnding that strategies with
a 1-month and 6-month formation period are only weakly correlated. Finally, Ehsani
and Linnainmaa ( 2022a), Gupta and Kelly ( 2019), and Arnott et al. ( 2021) provide
consistent evidence that factor portfolios exhibit momentum. Ehsani and Linnainmaa
(2022a) ﬁnd that stock momentum is fully spanned by factor momentum, especially
by momentum found in the factors’ highest eigenvalue principal components. Further,
by constructing momentum-neutral factors, the authors show that factor momentum
drives stock momentum and not vice versa. Arnott et al. (2021) highlights that industry
momentum is driven by factor momentum.
2 Outlining momentum
2.1 General approach
Return continuation documented by Jegadeesh and Titman ( 1993) contrasts with ear-
lier research of De Bondt and Thaler ( 1985) and Jegadeesh ( 1990). De Bondt and
Thaler ( 1985) ﬁnd that stocks that have performed poorly over the last 3–5 years
123

98 T. Wiest
achieve better returns than stocks that performed well over the next 3–5 years. They
argue that this results from an overreaction of investors to new information, and the
subsequent returns are due to a reversal to the true ﬁrm value. Jegadeesh ( 1990) high-
lights short-term reversals in stock returns and proposes that this is due to corrections
after periods of low liquidity and price pressures in which stock price movements tend
to be exacerbated.
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) construct a cross-sectional momentum strategy whose
underlying approach has been used and adapted by a myriad of follow-up papers on
momentum. First, for each month, they calculate cumulative stock returns over a so-
called look-back or formation period, which is usually between 3 and 12 months.
Second, they use these returns to sort stocks into decile portfolios and calculate
equal-weighted portfolio returns over the holding period. Finally, the cross-sectional
momentum strategy return is the return of the highest past return portfolio minus lowest
past return portfolio. It is common to skip 1 month between the formation and holding
period to isolate momentum from the short-term reversal effect (e.g., Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993), Carhart (1997)o rA s n e s se ta l .(2013)). Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
ﬁnd that momentum yields signiﬁcant and positive returns across all combinations of
3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month formation and holding periods.

)o rA s n e s se ta l .(2013)). Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
ﬁnd that momentum yields signiﬁcant and positive returns across all combinations of
3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month formation and holding periods.
To illustrate the potential sources of momentum, Lewellen ( 2002) decomposes the
expected return of a cross-sectional momentum strategy with a 1-month formation
and a 1-month holding period. The weight of each of N stocks is given by:
w
i,t = 1
N (ri,t−1 − rm.t−1) (1)
where rm,t−1 is the return of a equal-weighted market portfolio in month t − 1. The
zero-cost strategy is thus long in past winners and short past losers. The expected proﬁt
can be written as:
E[π mom
i,t ]= N − 1
N 2 tr (/Omega1)− 1
N 2 [ι′/Omega1ι− tr (/Omega1)]+ σ 2
μ (2)
where /Omega1is the 1-month autocovariance matrix of returns and σ 2
μ is the cross-sectional
variance of expected returns. The decomposition reveals three different sources of
momentum. First, momentum arises when stocks are positively autocorrelated: a high
return today predicts a high return tomorrow. Second, negative cross-serial correlations
also contribute to momentum proﬁts. In that case, a stock’s high past return predicts
other stocks’ low future returns. Third, momentum can be proﬁtable because stocks
have different expected returns that are persistent over time. A stock with high (low)
return expectations will likely have higher (lower) realized returns in the future. In

proﬁtable because stocks
have different expected returns that are persistent over time. A stock with high (low)
return expectations will likely have higher (lower) realized returns in the future. In
such a case, there is no need for time-series predictability to proﬁt from momentum.
2.2 Alternatives and improvements
Moskowitz et al. (2012) defer from the standard cross-sectional momentum approach
and instead test for time-series momentum. After scaling returns of various developed
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 99
market equity indices, commodities, currencies, and government bond futures by an
ex ante volatility estimate, they ﬁnd that from 1965 to 2009, past 12-month returns
positively predict next month’s returns. Within a pooled panel regression, the β on
past returns is positive and statistically signiﬁcant with a t-statistic of over 5. A trading
strategy that goes long (short) when past returns are positive (negative) produces
statistically positive mean returns at the 5% level for 52 of the 58 assets. The equal-
weighted time-series momentum returns over all assets are robust to various risk
adjustments and to the returns of a cross-sectional stock momentum strategy. The
proﬁts are not only higher than cross-sectional momentum proﬁts but also able to
fully explain them. Moskowitz et al. ( 2012) show that this is due to positive cross-
asset serial correlation, therefore reducing cross-sectional momentum proﬁts, as shown
in Eq. 2.
However, more recent studies question the results of Moskowitz et al. (2012). Goyal
and Jegadeesh ( 2018) argue that the better performance of time-series momentum is
due to higher leverage. Cross-sectional momentum is a zero-cost strategy, whereas
time-series momentum is usually net long as past returns are more often positive
than negative. After scaling the cross-sectional strategy by adding an investment into
a market portfolio equal to the net position of the time-series momentum strategy,

turns are more often positive
than negative. After scaling the cross-sectional strategy by adding an investment into
a market portfolio equal to the net position of the time-series momentum strategy,
both strategies perform similarly for individual stocks. The leveraged cross-sectional
strategy outperforms for international asset class portfolios. The underperformance
of the time-series strategy is largely due to the volatility scaling, leading to a huge
position in bonds that usually exhibit low volatility and low excess returns. Huang
et al. ( 2020) criticize the pooled regression approach in Moskowitz et al. ( 2012)t o
determine autocovariance because it ignores differences in mean returns across asset
classes. After regressing each asset separately on its past 12-month returns, only 8
out of 55 slope coefﬁcients are signiﬁcant on the 10% level. Further, they show that a
strategy that goes long if the unconditional mean of past returns is positive produces
similar proﬁts as the strategy based on past 12-month returns. This suggests that proﬁts
are not due to the predictability of returns but due to differences in expected returns.
Blitz et al. ( 2011) ﬁnd that a raw return momentum strategy based on past 12-
month returns, excluding the most recent month, has time-varying factor exposure.
They create a residual momentum strategy by adjusting raw returns with the three risk
factors of Fama and French ( 1993) and then sorting on residuals. Due to the reduced

ime-varying factor exposure.
They create a residual momentum strategy by adjusting raw returns with the three risk
factors of Fama and French ( 1993) and then sorting on residuals. Due to the reduced
factor exposure, the volatility of the residual momentum strategy is almost reduced by
half compared to the raw momentum strategy, boosting the annual Sharpe ratio from
0.45 to 0.90.
Instead of the usual 12-month minus the most recent month formation period,
Novy-Marx (2012) sorts returns from t-12 to t-7 to create an intermediate momentum
strategy. From 1927 to 2010, the intermediate momentum strategy produces monthly
proﬁts of 1.20%, much higher than a t-6 to t-2 momentum strategy that produces
0.67%. The intermediate momentum returns are robust even after controlling for the
risk factors of Fama and French ( 1993) (size and value) Carhart ( 1997) (momentum).
Daniel and Moskowitz ( 2016) tackle the issue that momentum crashes in times
of high market volatility when markets rebound after bear markets. They formulate a
dynamic momentum strategy whose position is scaled proportionally to its conditional
Sharpe ratio. Conditional expected returns take into account the negative effects of high
123

100 T. Wiest
Time
Value
positive information event
delayed
overreaction
long-term
reversal
stock price
fundamental value
a Delayed Overreaction
Time
Value
b Initial Underreaction
positive information event
initial
underreaction
fundamental value
stock price
Fig. 2 This ﬁgure sketches the stock price movement (red) after a positive information event in relation to
its fundamental value (grey) for a the delayed overreaction models and b the initial underreaction models
market volatility and past market declines. Conditional variance is estimated using a
GJR GARCH model. From 1934 to 2013, the dynamic momentum strategy produces
a Sharpe ratio of 1 .20, therefore almost doubling the Sharpe ratio of 0 .68 of the
standard zero-cost momentum strategy. The results of Daniel and Moskowitz ( 2016)
are consistent with those of Barroso and Santa-Clara ( 2015) and Moreira and Muir
(2017), who show that scaling by realized volatility signiﬁcantly improves momentum
strategies.
3 Explanations for momentum
As shown, the literature generally agrees that momentum exists, is persistent, and spans
a variety of asset classes and countries. However, the origin of this perhaps strongest
contradiction to the weak form of Fama ( 1970)’s efﬁcient market hypothesis is still
hotly debated. The two main strands of literature trying to explain momentum differ
in the rationality assumption in investors. Risk-based explanations treat investors as

t market hypothesis is still
hotly debated. The two main strands of literature trying to explain momentum differ
in the rationality assumption in investors. Risk-based explanations treat investors as
rational and momentum proﬁts compensate for risks that arise from trading momen-
tum. Behavioral explanations suggest that investors exhibit certain biases that inﬂuence
their trading behavior and drive stock prices away from their fundamental value.
3.1 Behavioral explanations
Behavioral models for momentum usually assume serial correlation of individual stock
returns. This serial correlation is driven by investors’ biases and the inability to instan-
taneously and correctly price new information. Generally, studies have emphasized
underreaction, overreaction, and disposition effects as drivers of momentum.
Daniel et al. ( 1998) argue that momentum stems from investors’ biased self-
attribution and overconﬁdence. In their model, investors ﬁrst trade stocks based on
signals gathered from their research. If a public signal later conﬁrms the private sig-
nal, overconﬁdence increases. If a positive public information event occurs after a buy
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 101
based on private information, investors attribute the success to their skill and further
drive the price up. If a public signal disagrees with the buy, they discard the signal as
external noise and do not readjust their price expectation. Therefore, as depicted in
Fig. 1a, on average public signals will drive prices away from fundamental values in
the direction of their private signal. Public information will gradually reverse stock
prices to their fundamental value in the long term. The delayed overreaction model of
Daniel et al. ( 1998) is consistent with medium-term positive autocovariance in stock
returns found by Jegadeesh and Titman ( 1993) and long-term reversals found by De
Bondt and Thaler ( 1985).
As depicted in Fig. 1b, initial underreaction to information can also cause momen-
tum. New information is not fully incorporated into stock prices, driving them away
from their fundamental value. Barberis et al. ( 1998) argue that conservatism bias—an
under-weighing of new information—drives the initial underreaction. While investors
update their posteriors in the right direction when faced with new evidence, they do
not do so in the same magnitude as a rational Bayesian benchmark. The subsequent
price adjustments to the stock’s intrinsic value produce positive autocovariance and
thus momentum in stock returns.
Unifying under- and overreaction theories, Hong and Stein ( 1999) introduce

equent
price adjustments to the stock’s intrinsic value produce positive autocovariance and
thus momentum in stock returns.
Unifying under- and overreaction theories, Hong and Stein ( 1999) introduce
a model with two types of investors—“news-watchers” and "momentum-traders".
News-watchers estimate stock prices based on news they privately observe but not
based on past or current prices. Momentum-traders, on the other hand, condition their
stock forecasts only on past and current prices. Private signals diffuse only gradu-
ally across the news-watchers, leading to initial underreaction. Momentum traders
chase past performance, thereby accelerating the initial price reaction to the point
of overreaction. Interestingly, Hong and Stein ( 1999) do not rely on any irrational-
ity assumptions—both actors act rationally within the boundaries of their respective
subset of available information.
Much literature has since come forward to corroborate the models of Daniel et al.
(1998) and Hong and Stein (1999) with empirical evidence. In support of Daniel et al.
(1998), Chui et al. (2010) capture cross-country differences in self-attribution bias and
overconﬁdence with the individualism index of Hofstede ( 2001), which they argue is
positively related to these attributes. The authors ﬁnd that proﬁtability of momentum
in a country is positively related to individualism: average monthly momentum returns
are 0.60% higher in countries that rank in the top 30% based on individualism than in

at proﬁtability of momentum
in a country is positively related to individualism: average monthly momentum returns
are 0.60% higher in countries that rank in the top 30% based on individualism than in
countries that rank in the bottom 30%. More recently, Hillert et al. ( 2014) corroborate
the overreaction model of Daniel et al. (1998) by constructing a ﬁrm-speciﬁc measure
for excess media coverage that controls for ﬁrm size, analyst coverage, and stock index
memberships. Arguing that newspapers act as a source for investors’ private signals,
the authors show that monthly momentum proﬁts are three times higher (1.02% vs.
0.33%) when using the subset of stocks in the highest quintile of media coverage than
when using stocks in the lowest quintile. They further provide evidence for Daniel et al.
(1998) and Chui et al. (2010) by demonstrating that this spread increases for stocks with
higher uncertainty, which overconﬁdent investors favor, and in highly individualistic
states. Finally, in line with the overreaction models, the media momentum proﬁts
reverse in the long run.
123

102 T. Wiest
Hong et al. ( 2000) show that momentum is mostly driven by small ﬁrms, and
after controlling for ﬁrm size, that momentum works better when analyst coverage
is low. Arguing that information travels more slowly for smaller and less covered
ﬁrms, they thus provide supporting evidence for the hypothesis of Hong and Stein
(1999) that the initial underreaction to news is due to the slow, gradual diffusion
of information. Similarly, Zhang ( 2006) shows that momentum effects increase with
information uncertainty. They ﬁnd that the degree to which good (bad) news predicts
high (low) future returns is higher for small and young ﬁrms, for ﬁrms with high
cash ﬂow volatility, for ﬁrms with low analyst coverage and high analyst forecast
dispersion, and for stocks with high return volatility. More recently, Antoniou et al.
(2013) ﬁnd that a 6-month momentum strategy produces average monthly returns
of 2.00% when investor sentiment is high but only 0.34% when investor sentiment
is low. The authors argue that investors’ slow diffusion of information in Hong and
Stein (1999) is exacerbated by cognitive dissonance that arises from information that
contradicts their level of optimism. In good times, bad news for loser stocks will
diffuse more slowly than in pessimistic times, resulting in subsequent negative returns
for loser stocks. Antoniou et al. (2013) show that this effect is more pronounced when

ws for loser stocks will
diffuse more slowly than in pessimistic times, resulting in subsequent negative returns
for loser stocks. Antoniou et al. (2013) show that this effect is more pronounced when
severe short-selling constraints limit arbitrageurs’ ability to push down loser stocks to
their intrinsic value.
Finally, Cooper et al. (2004) ﬁnd that the success of momentum depends on the state
of the market. From 1929 to 1995, if the market was up over the last 3 years, momentum
produced a mean monthly return of 0.93%, otherwise only −0.37%. They link their
results to Daniel et al. (1998)’s assumption of investor overconﬁdence. Since investors
are long in equities on aggregate and due to their self-attribution bias, an up-market
state will lead to a higher increase in conﬁdence and thus to higher overreactions and
momentum. Additionally, in line with overreaction theory, Cooper et al. ( 2004) ﬁnd
reversal of momentum proﬁts in the long term.
Novy-Marx (2012) ﬁnds evidence against the positive short-term autocorrelation
predicted by underreaction and overreaction models. He shows that the predictive
power of past returns is only inherent in the intermediate horizon. Sorting on past 12-
to 7-month returns produces larger proﬁts than standard momentum and generates
alpha even after controlling for risk factors of Fama and French ( 1993) and for the
momentum factor of Carhart ( 1997). Additionally, stocks winning in the short term

standard momentum and generates
alpha even after controlling for risk factors of Fama and French ( 1993) and for the
momentum factor of Carhart ( 1997). Additionally, stocks winning in the short term
but losing in the intermediate term signiﬁcantly underperform stocks losing in the
short term but winning in the intermediate term, providing further evidence against
the short-term continuation of stock price movements predicted by Daniel et al. (1998)
and Hong and Stein ( 1999).
Alternatively, George and Hwang ( 2004) explain momentum with an anchoring
bias, where investors’ decisions are inﬂuenced by or driven towards a certain reference
point. The anchor in their study is a stock’s 52-week high price, which most newspapers
reporting on the stock market publish. The authors propose that for stocks near their
52-week high, new positive information is at ﬁrst only partially incorporated into
prices because traders are reluctant to cross the anchoring point. Similarly, bad news
does not—to the extent that would be warranted—drive down prices of stocks that are
already far away from their 52-week high. To create a momentum strategy, George and
Hwang (2004) rank stocks based on their distance to the 52-week high price and go
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 103
long (short) in the 30% stocks with the lowest (highest) distance. After controlling for
size and skipping a month between ranking and holding period, returns of the 52-week
strategy are about twice as large as the standard momentum strategy, indicating that
not past returns but price levels are important predictors for the cross-section of future
returns.
Grinblatt and Han ( 2005) propose that a disposition effect in investors drives
momentum. Per prospect theory, because of a kink at a reference point in his utility
function, an investor is risk-averse after gaining on his reference point and risk-seeking
after suffering losses. The reference point in the case of the stock market is the aver-
age buying price. Thus, the model predicts that after positive news and a stock price
increase, there is excess selling pressure on the stock, while after negative news,
investors tend to hold on to the stock for too long. Grinblatt and Han ( 2005) calculate
the reference point by calculating a probability-weighted average of past prices, where
the probabilities are based on past turnover and measure the likelihood that a stock
was purchased in the respective period. They ﬁnd that returns of a momentum strategy
sorting on the distance to the reference point can fully explain standard momentum
based on past returns.
3.2 Risk-based explanations

e respective period. They ﬁnd that returns of a momentum strategy
sorting on the distance to the reference point can fully explain standard momentum
based on past returns.
3.2 Risk-based explanations
Contrary to behavioral explanations, risk-based explanations test potential sources of
momentum without having to leave the sphere of rational investors and Fama (1970)’s
efﬁcient market hypothesis. Instead, momentum proﬁts are considered to be com-
pensation for risk. Risk-based models make sense of the decade-long persistence of
momentum. While there is room for rational investors to proﬁt from near-arbitrage
in the behavioral model and to neutralize any momentum effects, there are no proﬁts
without additional risk in the realm of risk-based models. In the Abritrage Pricing
Theory of Ross ( 1976) stocks’ expected excess returns are a linear combination of
expected returns of priced risk factors μ
f
t multiplied by the stocks’ exposures to the
respective risk factors β f :
μi =
F∑
i=1
β f μ f (3)
A stock momentum strategy can be risky in two ways.
First, higher (lower) returns in the cross-section of past returns are due to relatively
higher (lower) risk exposure, and the relative risk exposure is persistent in the future.
A dispersion in risk exposures leads to dispersion in expected returns, σ 2
μ, thus pro-
ducing momentum proﬁts through the third channel of Lewellen ( 2002)’s momentum
decomposition illustrated in Eq. 2. Conrad and Kaul ( 1998) ﬁnd high importance of
σ 2

pected returns, σ 2
μ, thus pro-
ducing momentum proﬁts through the third channel of Lewellen ( 2002)’s momentum
decomposition illustrated in Eq. 2. Conrad and Kaul ( 1998) ﬁnd high importance of
σ 2
μ for momentum. They document that the cross-sectional dispersion of mean returns
contributed to 539% of proﬁts of a momentum strategy with a 12-month look-back
period. There are three drawbacks to Conrad and Kaul ( 1998)’s hypothesis. First,
Jegadeesh and Titman ( 2002) ﬁnd that the ﬁndings of Conrad and Kaul ( 1998)a r e
mainly due to small sample biases. Some expected returns are calculated with less
123

104 T. Wiest
than 12 months of data, resulting in unreasonable ex ante estimates for stock returns,
with both negative values and values above 100%. Second, constant expected returns
cannot explain long-term reversals in stock prices. Third, if higher expected returns
are due to higher risk exposure, then APT risk factor models should be able to explain
momentum proﬁts. Suppose, for example, the winner portfolio outperformed the loser
portfolio because of higher past market-risk exposure, and the differences in expo-
sure are persistent. In that case, the momentum strategy should inhibit positive market
betas. However, both Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and Grundy and Martin (2001) ﬁnd
that momentum proﬁts are robust to market-risk adjustments, and Fama and French
(1996) ﬁnd that even their three-factor model is unable to explain momentum proﬁts.
More recently, however, Kelly et al. ( 2021) ﬁnd conditional factor exposures help to
explain momentum proﬁts. Whereas a traditional based on past t-2 to t-12 month raw
returns delivers annual proﬁts of 8.3%, a residual momentum strategy where returns
are adjusted using conditional factor exposures only delivers 4.4%. Instead of using
rolling-window regressions or higher-frequency data to estimate their conditional β
f
t ,
they estimate them as a function of time-varying and observable ﬁrm characteristics.
Second, the riskiness of stocks might increase with positive returns and drop with
negative returns.

tional β
f
t ,
they estimate them as a function of time-varying and observable ﬁrm characteristics.
Second, the riskiness of stocks might increase with positive returns and drop with
negative returns. In a single ﬁrm model, Johnson ( 2002) shows that changes in stock
prices in response to growth rate changes are highly convex. Therefore, growth rate
risk, which is assumed to be positively priced in the stochastic discount factor, rises
with the level of growth rates. If starting levels of growth rates are similar between
winner stocks and loser stocks, and if then some positive (negative) returns among
the winner (loser) portfolio are due to a positive (negative) growth rate shock, then
momentum is implicitly a sort on growth rates. Momentum is therefore a compensation
for higher growth rate risk.
Berk et al. ( 1999) ﬁnd a way to unify short-term negative and longer-term positive
autocorrelation in stock returns within a rational model. The authors determine a
ﬁrm’s value as the sum of discounted cash ﬂows of the current asset base and the
value of its growth options. When ﬁrms realize an attractive investment into a low-risk
project, the ﬁrm value increases sharply. However, the expected return lowers with
the decrease in riskiness, thereby generating short-term return reversals. On the other
hand, if project turnover is slow, the ﬁrm’s asset base, systematic risk, and expected
returns are persistent, generating return momentum, particularly over the horizon of

urn reversals. On the other
hand, if project turnover is slow, the ﬁrm’s asset base, systematic risk, and expected
returns are persistent, generating return momentum, particularly over the horizon of
its projects’ life cycle.
Similarly, Sagi and Seasholes (2007) document that momentum is stronger in high
book-to-market ﬁrms because these ﬁrms have better growth options. After good
news on growth opportunities, both ﬁrm value and the fraction of ﬁrm value in growth
options rise. Because these growth options are riskier than the steady-revenue pro-
ducing existing assets, the ﬁrm on aggregate becomes riskier, and investors demand
a higher expected return as compensation. Pástor and Stambaugh ( 2003) construct a
market-wide liquidity measure as an equal-weighted average of stocks’ liquidity. They
measure liquidity as the order volume-induced return reversals from 1 day to the next.
After sorting on stocks’ sensitivity to market liquidity, they ﬁnd that liquidity risk is
priced in the cross-section of returns. Importantly for risk-based explanations, this
liquidity risk factor explains 50% of momentum returns. Avramov et al. ( 2007) ﬁnd
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 105
that low credit rating ﬁrms largely drive momentum proﬁts. They create momentum
strategies with a 6-month holding period using equal-weighted portfolios sorted on
past 7-month returns but skipping the most recent month. After excluding ﬁrms with
an S&P rating below BB, momentum effects become insigniﬁcant. On the other hand,
sorts including only stocks with a rating of B or lower produce statistically signiﬁcant
proﬁts of 3.74% per month.
4 Commonalities in momentum
Behavior-based explanations for momentum argue that past winners outperform past
losers based on individual stock mispricing due to underreactions or overreactions.
However, if such ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects are uncorrelated, rational investors could proﬁt
from near-arbitrage as systematic risks would be diversiﬁed away in a broad long-short
momentum portfolio (Moskowitz and Grinblatt1999). Additionally, ﬁrm-speciﬁc mis-
pricing does not answer the question as to why the past winner and loser stocks co-move
in the future and why the momentum factor should be priced and load on the stochas-
tic discount factor. As John Cochrane noted in his presidential address: "why should
all the momentum stocks then rise and fall together the next month, just as if they
are exposed to a pervasive, systematic risk?" [p.1075]Cochrane ( 2011). To determine
whether momentum is due to mispricing or due to systematic risk, a new strand of lit-

next month, just as if they
are exposed to a pervasive, systematic risk?" [p.1075]Cochrane ( 2011). To determine
whether momentum is due to mispricing or due to systematic risk, a new strand of lit-
erature analyzes momentum in portfolios that capture the factor structures underlying
individual stocks. Moskowitz and Grinblatt ( 1999) ﬁnds positive returns for a strat-
egy sorting on past industry returns due to positive serial autocovariances of industry
factors. More recently, Gupta and Kelly ( 2019), Arnott et al. ( 2021), and Ehsani and
Linnainmaa (2022b) ﬁnd momentum in factor returns used to explain the cross-section
of stock returns due to serial autocovariances of risk factors.
4.1 Industry momentum
Moskowitz and Grinblatt ( 1999) construct 20 value-weighted industry portfolios and
employ a strategy that invests equally in the top three industries while shorting the
bottom three industries based on their past 6 months’ returns. With a holding period
of 6 months, this strategy achieves an average return of 0.43% from July 1963 to July
1995. After ﬁnding negligible factor serial correlation, ﬁrm-speciﬁc serial correlation,
and cross-sectional dispersion of industry mean returns—three components that could
produce industry momentum proﬁts—the authors conclude that industry momentum is
due to positive serial correlation in industry returns. Further, Moskowitz and Grinblatt
(1999) subtract industry returns from stock returns and then sort on the industry-

e that industry momentum is
due to positive serial correlation in industry returns. Further, Moskowitz and Grinblatt
(1999) subtract industry returns from stock returns and then sort on the industry-
adjusted 6-month returns. The resulting momentum strategy produces only 0.13% per
month compared to 0.43% of a momentum strategy based on raw stock returns. These
results provide evidence that stock momentum is at least partly driven by industry
momentum. However, the study shows that industry momentum is most proﬁtable
with a 1-month look-back and 1-month holding period. This ﬁnding is in stark contrast
to the short-term reversals in stocks found by Jegadeesh ( 1990). Grundy and Martin
123

106 T. Wiest
(2001) also construct a momentum strategy based on value-weighted industry returns
but include a 1-month interval between the formation and the investment period.
For the same sample period as Moskowitz and Grinblatt ( 1999), proﬁts decrease to
an insigniﬁcant 0.16% per month. After highlighting the importance of the 1-month
autocovariance in industry returns, the authors conclude that it is too early to proclaim
industry momentum as the main source of stock momentum.
Hoberg and Phillips ( 2018) rely on text-based network industry classiﬁcations
(TNIC) instead of ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations. The authors collect public ﬁrms’
product descriptions stated in 10-K reports ﬁled with the SEC. After analyzing these
texts, each ﬁrm is assigned its own set of distinct competitors based on product sim-
ilarity (Hoberg and Phillips 2016). Hoberg and Phillips ( 2018) ﬁnd that while return
shocks to peers classiﬁed by public industry classiﬁcations transmit to a ﬁrm within 1–
2 months, return shocks to peers classiﬁed by TNIC take up to 12 months. Additionally,
they ﬁnd that industry momentum proﬁts are stronger following shocks to companies
whose similarity is less visible to investors. This stronger form of industry momentum
is robust to the criticism of Grundy and Martin (2001) that short-term autocovariances
heavily drive momentum in industry returns. The fact that momentum is stronger and

ger form of industry momentum
is robust to the criticism of Grundy and Martin (2001) that short-term autocovariances
heavily drive momentum in industry returns. The fact that momentum is stronger and
longer-lasting after shocks to less visible industry peers provides evidence for the the-
ory of Barberis et al. ( 1998) and Hong and Stein ( 1999) that momentum stems from
inattention or slow-moving information.
With a longer sample from July 1926 to February 2018 and with more granu-
lar industry classiﬁcations—48 industries instead of 20—Grobys and Kolari ( 2020)
investigate industry momentum based on the ideas of Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999).
The authors construct three different industry momentum strategies. The ﬁrst strategy
(1–0–1) is long in the quintile of industries with the highest return over the previous
month and short in the quintile of industries with the lowest return. The other two
strategies (6–1–1) and (12–1–1) are based on compounded industry returns over the
last 6 and 12 months but skipping the most recent month. The three strategies pro-
duce mean monthly returns of 0.62% (1–0–1), 0.57% (6–1–1), and 0.80% (12–1–1),
respectively. The correlation of only 0.14 between the (1–0–1) and the (12–1–1) strat-
egy is fairly low, suggesting that there are multiple independent forms of industry
momentum and that not only the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation in industry-returns drives
industry momentum. Although returns of the (1–0–1) strategy signiﬁcantly load on

ple independent forms of industry
momentum and that not only the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation in industry-returns drives
industry momentum. Although returns of the (1–0–1) strategy signiﬁcantly load on
a market risk factor ( −), on the Fama and French ( 1993)S M B( −) and HML ( +)
factors, as well as on the (6–1–1) ( +) strategy, a statistically signiﬁcant monthly α of
0.56% remains.
Further, Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) built on the studies of Barroso and Santa-Clara
(2015) and Moreira and Muir (2017) to improve stock momentum strategies by scaling
the (1–0–1) strategy based on its realized volatility of daily returns over the previ-
ous month. The strategy is scaled down when volatility is high and scaled up when
volatility is low. Like Moreira and Muir ( 2017), Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) consider
leverage-constrained volatility-managed strategies by limiting the up-scaling factor to
1 and 1.5. The unconstrained strategy achieves mean monthly returns of 1.16%, while
the leveraged constrained strategies produce monthly returns of 0.64% and 0.90%.
Notably, the original (1–0–1) strategy exhibited a negative skewness of−0.47, whereas
the volatility-managed strategies do not exhibit skewness risk. The improved returns
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 107
cannot be explained by additional exposure to the original strategy or to the Fama
and French ( 1993) risk factors. Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) also test whether industry
momentum exhibits the same optionality as stock momentum. As discussed in chapter
2.2, stock momentum strategies behave similarly to a short call option at the end of
bear markets (Daniel and Moskowitz 2016). The authors ﬁnd that all of their three
industry momentum strategies do not exhibit optionality effects. The strategies’ returns
do not load negatively on an interaction term of an ex ante bear market indicator, an
contemporaneous up-market indicator, and a value-weighted market factor. Lewellen
et al. ( 2010) ﬁnd that standard factor models such as the three-factor model of Fama
and French (1993) poorly explain the cross-section of industry returns. For this reason,
Grobys and Kolari ( 2020) include the industry momentum strategies to estimate the
stochastic discount factor to price industry portfolios. They ﬁnd that the inclusion of
the (1–0–1) strategy into the pricing kernel reduces pricing errors on a 5% signiﬁcance
level, while the other two strategies are not useful for pricing industry portfolios.
In a recent study, Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) propose the number of shared analysts
between ﬁrms as a reﬁned measure to capture ﬁrm connections. For any ﬁrm, the

eful for pricing industry portfolios.
In a recent study, Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) propose the number of shared analysts
between ﬁrms as a reﬁned measure to capture ﬁrm connections. For any ﬁrm, the
portfolio of connected ﬁrms (CF) is constructed as a linear combination of ﬁrms that
share at least one analyst with the ﬁrm. The number of pairwise shared analysts gives
the weights of each connected ﬁrm. The authors ﬁnd that the contemporaneous rela-
tion between a ﬁrm’s and its CFs’ sales growth is stronger than the relation between
a ﬁrm’s and its industry’s sales growth, providing evidence that their shared analyst
measure captures fundamental similarities between ﬁrms better than an industry clas-
siﬁcation. Stocks are sorted into quintiles based on their CFs’ past month return to
construct a momentum strategy. Depending on whether quintile returns are calculated
with value- or equal-weighting, the momentum strategy produces monthly 4-factor
alphas of 0.89% and 1.81%. In spanning tests, Ali and Hirshleifer ( 2020) ﬁnd that
after controlling for CF momentum, none of industry, geographic, customer, supplier
industry, or technology momentum delivers signiﬁcant 4-factor alphas. Notably, none
of the other momentum strategies can explain CF momentum returns. The authors con-
clude that there is only one dominating spillover effect driving momentum, namely
the one that arises because analysts with limited attention only slowly transmit new

mentum returns. The authors con-
clude that there is only one dominating spillover effect driving momentum, namely
the one that arises because analysts with limited attention only slowly transmit new
information from one ﬁrm that they cover to the others.
Related to research on industry momentum is style momentum. Chou et al. ( 2019)
construct a momentum strategy not based on industry classiﬁcation but on stocks’
co-movement with an investment style. They build their hypothesis on a study by
Barberis and Shleifer ( 2003) who show in a model that investors’ style chasing can
lead to positive autocorrelation of style returns. The authors focus on a ﬁrm’s asset
growth as the investment style, because it negatively predicts future returns (Cooper
et al. 2008), it is a familiar measure to investors, and it is priced in the cross-section of
stock returns (Fama and French 2015). Portfolio sorts are constructed by ﬁrst splitting
stocks into three groups based on their 12-month past return, and then splitting each
group by three based on the stocks’ beta to the asset growth style returns. With a
holding period of 6 months, the momentum strategy constructed from the lowest style
beta stocks produces a mean monthly return of 0.14%. In contrast, the momentum
strategy constructed from the highest style beta stocks produces a mean return of
0.60%. The difference of 0.46% is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
123

108 T. Wiest
Additionally, Chou et al. ( 2019) construct a momentum strategy from 25 value-
weighted portfolios sorted by asset growth and size. The strategy goes long (short)
in the seven portfolios with the highest (lowest) past 12-month return. The average
monthly returns to this strategy are 0.76% for a 3-month holding period and 0.48% for
a 12-month holding period. Finally, the authors ﬁnd that the style momentum strategy
returns are higher than those of a stock momentum strategy, they remain signiﬁcant
after adjusting for the Fama-French risk factors, and they are not due to higher risk
exposure to the investment factor itself. Due to the absence of such risk-based explana-
tions for the style momentum proﬁts, Chou et al. (2019) turn to behavioral explanations.
They propose that investors under-react to style performance when stocks are stable
in their style because their attention is limited to stocks changing styles. They provide
evidence for this hypothesis by showing that a style momentum strategy limited to
stocks that change between the 25 asset growth-size portfolios within 2 years prior
to portfolio formation achieves considerable lower returns than an identical strategy
limited to stocks that do not change style (0.31% versus 0.60%).
4.2 Factor momentum
Several studies have recently documented momentum in a broad set of factor portfolios.
Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) show that if stock returns are a linear combination
of factor returns as shown in Eq.

eral studies have recently documented momentum in a broad set of factor portfolios.
Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) show that if stock returns are a linear combination
of factor returns as shown in Eq. 3, then a cross-sectional momentum strategy of N
stocks can be decomposed as follows:
E[π
mom
i,t ]=
F∑
f =1
[cov(r f
−t, r f
t )σ 2
β f ]
  
factor autocovariances
+
F∑
f =1
F∑
g̸= f
[cov(r f
−t, r g
t )cov(β f ,β g)]
  
factor cross-serial covariances
+ 1
N
N∑
i=1
[cov(ϵi,−t,ϵi,t)]
  
autocovariances in residuals
+ σ 2
η
variation in mean returns
(4)
where σ 2
β f and σ 2
η are the cross-sectional variances of factor exposures and uncon-
ditional expected stock returns. Four channels drive factor momentum: positive
autocovariance in factor returns that is ampliﬁed by dispersion in stocks’ exposures
to the respective factor, cross-serial autocovariance between factors, autocovariance
in returns not explained by factor exposure, and cross-sectional dispersion in stocks’
mean returns.
Gupta and Kelly (2019) highlight the importance of the ﬁrst channel with a sample
of 65 characteristics-based factor portfolios constructed by bivariate sorts, ﬁrst on size
and then on the characteristic. They show that factors exhibit time-series momentum.
Forty-nine of 65 have a statistically signiﬁcant positive ﬁrst-order autoregressive slope
coefﬁcient on the 5% level. Further, they construct a time-series momentum strategy

bit time-series momentum.
Forty-nine of 65 have a statistically signiﬁcant positive ﬁrst-order autoregressive slope
coefﬁcient on the 5% level. Further, they construct a time-series momentum strategy
that goes long (short) in a factor if its return over the look-back period is positive
(negative). The absolute exposure is determined by the magnitude of past returns and
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 109
the longer-term volatility but is limited to − 2 and 2, respectively. Strategies based on
1-month past returns produce positive and signiﬁcant alphas over the original factor
returns for 47 factors. A time-series-factor momentum strategy that combines all 65
factors yields an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.84. Returns are robust to controls for the
Fama and French ( 2015) risk factors, static factor returns, stock momentum, industry
momentum and short-term reversals. Factor momentum also outperforms standard
stock momentum in an international sample including Europe, Canada, and Paciﬁc-
Asia. Stock momentum can party explain factor momentum when the look-back period
is 1 year skipping the most recent month, but not for when the look-back period is the
most recent month. While stock returns reverse over 1 month, factor momentum works
best with that look-back period. The authors conclude that if factor momentum was
capturing stock-level momentum, one would expect it to exhibit short-term reversals.
Zhang (2022) also documents time-series factor momentum in two factors explain-
ing the cross-section of currency returns: dollar and carry. The dollar factor is the
average excess returns of foreign currencies over the US dollar. The carry factor is a
long-short portfolio based on the currencies’ forward discount. A strategy that com-
bines the two time-series momentum strategies outperforms usual time-series and

e US dollar. The carry factor is a
long-short portfolio based on the currencies’ forward discount. A strategy that com-
bines the two time-series momentum strategies outperforms usual time-series and
cross-sectional momentum strategies in currencies and fully spans them.
Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) shed light on the ﬁrst channel of factor momen-
tum: positive autocovariance in factor returns. They highlight that out of 20 factors, the
average monthly return after a year of positive returns is 51 bps, and after a year of neg-
ative returns, it is only 6 bps. Next, Ehsani and Linnainmaa (2022a) show that a model
of sentiment investors proposed by Kozak et al. ( 2018) can explain autocorrelation in
factors. The crux of the model is that sentiment-driven investors inhibit demand for
stocks in excess of a rational investor. If sentiment is sufﬁciently persistent, then the
excess demand produces persistence in factor returns. The autocovariance of principal
components of the matrix of asset cash ﬂows is given by:
cov( PC
k
t , PC k
t+1) = λ2
kβ2
k c0σ 2[(1 + R2
f )φ − R f − R f φ2] (5)
where R f is the risk-free rate plus 1, c0 is a constant that relates to the magnitude
in which sentiment-investor demand drives returns, σ 2 is the variance in sentiment-
investor demand, βk captures how well investor-demand in excess of rational demand
lines up with the kth eigenvector of the decomposition of the covariance matrix of
returns and λ is the eigenvalue of PC k .

r demand, βk captures how well investor-demand in excess of rational demand
lines up with the kth eigenvector of the decomposition of the covariance matrix of
returns and λ is the eigenvalue of PC k . There are two key takeaways from this equa-
tion. First, sentiment must be extremely persistent for the autocovariance to be positive.
For a risk-free monthly rate of 0.39%, the threshold is φ> 0.996. Second, for sig-
niﬁcant autocovariances, irrational demand of sentiment-driven investors must line
up with high eigenvalue principal components ( λ2
kβ2
k ). This is consistent with risk-
based explanations: factor momentum still exists because arbitrageurs would have to
carry high systematic risks. Further, Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) hypothesize that
factor momentum must be concentrated in the highest eigenvalue principal compo-
nents. They ﬁnd this in an expanded sample of 47 factors by constructing a time-series
momentum strategy from the ten dominant principal components. The returns of this
strategy explain most of the momentum in lower eigenvalue principal components
in the ﬁrst half of the sample period from 1973 to 2019, and all of it in the second
123

110 T. Wiest
half. Further, factor momentum subsumes cross-sectional stock momentum, industry
momentum, industry-adjusted momentum and intermediate horizon momentum. The
authors construct momentum-neutral factors to highlight that stock momentum stems
from factor momentum and not vice versa. Stock weights to construct factor portfolios
are updated by minimizing the change to the original weights while orthogonalizing
the weights to past returns. When constructing momentum strategies, such factors do
not beneﬁt from stock momentum and achieve even higher alphas than the original
ones. Finally, Ehsani and Linnainmaa (2022a) address the conﬂicting ﬁndings of, e.g.,
Blitz et al. ( 2011) that residual return momentum strategies perform better than raw
return strategies. Such results suggest that ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects drive momentum, not
exposures to factors with serial correlation. Ehsani and Linnainmaa (2022a) show that
residual momentum strategies proﬁt from omitted factor momentum. If omitted fac-
tors are more strongly autocorrelated than those used to adjust stock returns, residual
momentum yields better performance than stock momentum.
Arnott et al. ( 2021) connect stock momentum, factor momentum, and industry
momentum. With a sample of 43 US equity factor portfolios from 196 to 2020, they
construct a cross-sectional factor momentum strategy that is long in above-median
return factors and short below-median return factors over the look-back period. They

ortfolios from 196 to 2020, they
construct a cross-sectional factor momentum strategy that is long in above-median
return factors and short below-median return factors over the look-back period. They
highlight in two ways that factor momentum subsumes industry momentum. First,
momentum found in industry-neutral factors fully explains industry momentum. The
industry-neutral strategy is constructed by subtracting industry means from the stock
characteristics such that the factors are roughly exposed equally to the various indus-
tries. Second, Arnott et al. ( 2021) construct industry-mimicking portfolios as a linear
combination of factors, where the industries’ factor exposures give the weights. These
portfolios contain no industry-speciﬁc information but capture industries’ systemic
risks. Even mimicking portfolios built from a small set of factors exhibit similar
momentum as industry portfolios and subsume industry momentum as the number of
factors increases.
Additionally, Arnott et al. (2021) ﬁnd that momentum in the three highest eigenvalue
principal components of industry-neutral factors subsumes all industry momentum.
They connect these results with the argumentation of Ehsani and Linnainmaa (2022a).
There cannot be idiosyncratic stock or industry momentum, as it would not be con-
sistent with the existence of rational arbitrageurs. Only systematic factors can have
pricing effects; therefore, momentum concentrates in the high eigenvalue principal

entum, as it would not be con-
sistent with the existence of rational arbitrageurs. Only systematic factors can have
pricing effects; therefore, momentum concentrates in the high eigenvalue principal
components where arbitrageurs ﬁnd it risky to trade against it.
While Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) and Arnott et al. ( 2021) ﬁnd consistent evi-
dence that 1-year stock momentum is largely driven by factor momentum, it remains
an open question why stock returns reverse in the short-term, whereas monthly fac-
tor returns exhibit strong positive ﬁrst-order autocorrelation. In a follow-up working
paper, Ehsani and Linnainmaa (2022b) propose that residual momentum has additional
components other than ﬁrm-speciﬁc momentum, namely omitted factor momentum
and a betting-against-beta effect. The betting-against-beta effect stems from too ﬂat
security factor lines and can be illustrated with the example of CAPM residuals. If
the security market line is too ﬂat, high beta stocks earn negative alpha and low beta
stocks earn positive alphas. Sorting by CAPM residuals is thus equal to a betting-
against-beta sort. Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022b) remove the betting-against beta
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 111
effect by orthogonalizing the short-term stock residuals to the long-term betting against
beta effect. This is done by regressing stock returns on factors over a time period
over which returns display no momentum or reversals to estimate long-term alphas
attributed to the betting-against-beta effect. After, they run a cross-sectional regression
of short-term residuals on the long-term alphas. The residuals of this regression are the
beta-neutral residuals. A momentum strategy sorting on these beta-neutral residuals
yields an annual Sharpe ratio of 1.23, more than double the Sharpe ratio of 0.59 of
a standard residual momentum strategy. Further, the beta-neutral strategies are less
correlated to factor momentum. After analyzing autocorrelations of different order in
factor returns and beta neutral residuals, the authors conclude that short-term rever-
sal effects are purely ﬁrm-speciﬁc. In contrast, ﬁrm-speciﬁc momentum and factor
momentum create the intermediate momentum effect.
5 Conclusion
Overall, there is general agreement in academia that momentum strategies yield robust
and signiﬁcant proﬁts across various asset classes and around the globe. Moreover,
the proﬁts are robust to standard risk-factor adjustments and can be enhanced by
various changes in the construction methodology. Improvements include isolating
ﬁrm-speciﬁc returns from factor-exposure, scaling position with the inverse of ex ante

justments and can be enhanced by
various changes in the construction methodology. Improvements include isolating
ﬁrm-speciﬁc returns from factor-exposure, scaling position with the inverse of ex ante
volatility, or lagging the formation period to calculate past returns.
However, the origin of momentum is still debated. While both risk-based and
behavioral-based models provide reasonable arguments for the existence of ﬁrm-
speciﬁc momentum, new ﬁndings on the existence of industry momentum and factor
momentum lack theoretical foundation.
Another open question is the extent to which momentum in stocks is driven
by an exposure to systematic risk factors or to industry factors, which themselves
exhibit serial correlation. Ehsani and Linnainmaa ( 2022a) and Arnott et al. ( 2021)
ﬁnd that factor momentum subsumes both stock momentum and industry momentum.
Nonetheless, because factor returns exhibit strong ﬁrst-order autocorrelation, a pure
factor-driven stock momentum conﬂicts with short-term reversals.
To provide answers, future research faces the difﬁcult task of isolating ﬁrm-speciﬁc
returns from returns that arise from factor risk exposure. This is even more demanding
in light of a vast zoo of potentially priced risk factors, and in light of time-varying
factor exposures.
To summarize, momentum was one of the most prominent topics in ﬁnancial
research over the last three decades, and recent ﬁndings on the commonality in momen-

n light of time-varying
factor exposures.
To summarize, momentum was one of the most prominent topics in ﬁnancial
research over the last three decades, and recent ﬁndings on the commonality in momen-
tum effects present fruitful grounds for future prominence.
Acknowledgements The author thanks an anonymous referee as well as Prof. Dr. Manuel Ammann, Prof.
Dr. Markus Schmid, and discussants at the “Topics in Asset Management” PhD seminar of the University
of St. Gallen for their helpful suggestions.
Funding Open access funding provided by University of St.Gallen
123

112 T. Wiest
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Ali, U., Hirshleifer, D.: Shared analyst coverage: unifying momentum spillover effects. J. Financ. Econ.
136(3), 649–675 (2020)
Antoniou, C., Doukas, J.A., Subrahmanyam, A.: Cognitive dissonance, sentiment, and momentum. J. Financ.
Quant. Anal. 48(1), 245–275 (2013)
Arnott, R. D., Clements, M., Kalesnik, V ., Linnainmaa, J.T.: Factor momentum. Working Paper (2021)
Asness, C.S., Moskowitz, T.J., Pedersen, L.H.: V alue and momentum everywhere. J. Finance68(3), 929–985
(2013)
Avramov, D., Chordia, T., Jostova, G., Philipov, A.: Momentum and credit rating. J. Finance 62(5), 2503–
2520 (2007)

., Pedersen, L.H.: V alue and momentum everywhere. J. Finance68(3), 929–985
(2013)
Avramov, D., Chordia, T., Jostova, G., Philipov, A.: Momentum and credit rating. J. Finance 62(5), 2503–
2520 (2007)
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A.: Style investing. J. Financ. Econ. 68(2), 161–199 (2003)
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.: A model of investor sentiment. J. Financ. Econ.49(3), 307–343 (1998)
Barroso, P ., Santa-Clara, P .: Momentum has its moments. J. Financ. Econ. 116(1), 111–120 (2015)
Berk, J.B., Green, R.C., Naik, V .: Optimal investment, growth options, and security returns. J. Finance
54(5), 1553–1607 (1999)
Blitz, D., Huij, J., Martens, M.: Residual momentum. J. Empir. Financ. 18(3), 506–521 (2011)
Carhart, M.M.: On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Finance 52(1), 57–82 (1997)
Chou, P .-H., Ko, K.-C., Y ang, N.-T.: Asset growth, style investing, and momentum. J. Bank. Finance 98,
108–124 (2019)
Chui, A.C., Titman, S., Wei, K.J.: Individualism and momentum around the world. J. Finance65(1), 361–392
(2010)
Cochrane, J.H.: Presidential address: discount rates. J. Finance 66(4), 1047–1108 (2011)
Conrad, J., Kaul, G.: An anatomy of trading strategies. Rev. Financ. Stud. 11(3), 489–519 (1998)
Cooper, M.J., Gulen, H., Schill, M.J.: Asset growth and the cross-section of stock returns. J. Finance 63(4),
1609–1651 (2008)
Cooper, M.J., Gutierrez, R.C., Jr., Hameed, A.: Market states and momentum. J. Finance 59(3), 1345–1365
(2004)

Asset growth and the cross-section of stock returns. J. Finance 63(4),
1609–1651 (2008)
Cooper, M.J., Gutierrez, R.C., Jr., Hameed, A.: Market states and momentum. J. Finance 59(3), 1345–1365
(2004)
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A.: Investor psychology and security market under-and over-
reactions. J. Finance 53(6), 1839–1885 (1998)
Daniel, K., Moskowitz, T.J.: Momentum crashes. J. Financ. Econ. 122(2), 221–247 (2016)
De Bondt, W.F., Thaler, R.: Does the stock market overreact? J. Finance 40(3), 793–805 (1985)
Ehsani, S., Linnainmaa, J.T.: Factor momentum and the momentum factor. J. Finance 77(3), 1877–919
(2022)
Ehsani, S., Linnainmaa, J.T.: What does residual momentum tell us about ﬁrm-speciﬁc momentum? Working
Paper (2022b)
Fama, E.F.: Efﬁcient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work. J. Finance 25(2), 383–417
(1970)
Fama, E.F., French, K.R.: Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 33(1),
3–56 (1993)
Fama, E.F., French, K.R.: Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies. J. Finance 51(1), 55–84
(1996)
Fama, E.F., French, K.R.: A ﬁve-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116(1), 1–22 (2015)
George, T.J., Hwang, C.-Y .: The 52-week high and momentum investing. J. Finance 59(5), 2145–2176
(2004)
123

Momentum: what do we know 30 years after Jegadeesh and… 113
Goyal, A., Jegadeesh, N.: Cross-sectional and time-series tests of return predictability: what is the difference?
Rev. Financ. Stud. 31(5), 1784–1824 (2018)
Grinblatt, M., Han, B.: Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum. J. Financ. Econ.78(2), 311–339
(2005)
Grobys, K., Kolari, J.: On industry momentum strategies. J. Financ. Res. 43(1), 95–119 (2020)
Grundy, B.D., Martin, J.S.M.: Understanding the nature of the risks and the source of the rewards to
momentum investing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 14(1), 29–78 (2001)
Gupta, T., Kelly, B.: Factor momentum everywhere. J. Portf. Manag. 45(3), 13–36 (2019)
Hillert, A., Jacobs, H., Müller, S.: Media makes momentum. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27(12), 3467–3501 (2014)
Hoberg, G., Phillips, G.: Text-based network industries and endogenous product differentiation. J. Polit.
Econ. 124(5), 1423–1465 (2016)
Hoberg, G., Phillips, G.M.: Text-based industry momentum. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 53(6), 2355–2388
(2018)
Hofstede, G.: Culture’s Consequences: Comparing V alues, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations Across
Nations. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills (2001)
Hong, H., Lim, T., Stein, J.C.: Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst coverage, and the proﬁtability of
momentum strategies. J. Finance 55(1), 265–295 (2000)
Hong, H., Stein, J.C.: A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in asset
markets. J. Finance 54(6), 2143–2184 (1999)

momentum strategies. J. Finance 55(1), 265–295 (2000)
Hong, H., Stein, J.C.: A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in asset
markets. J. Finance 54(6), 2143–2184 (1999)
Huang, D., Li, J., Wang, L., Zhou, G.: Time series momentum: is it there? J. Financ. Econ. 135(3), 774–794
(2020)
Jegadeesh, N.: Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. J. Finance 45(3), 881–898 (1990)
Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S.: Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock market
efﬁciency. J. Finance 48(1), 65–91 (1993)
Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S.: Cross-sectional and time-series determinants of momentum returns. Rev. Financ.
Stud. 15(1), 143–157 (2002)
Johnson, T.C.: Rational momentum effects. J. Finance 57(2), 585–608 (2002)
Jostova, G., Nikolova, S., Philipov, A., Stahel, C.W.: Momentum in corporate bond returns. Rev. Financ.
Stud. 26(7), 1649–1693 (2013)
Kelly, B.T., Moskowitz, T.J., Pruitt, S.: Understanding momentum and reversal. J. Financ. Econ. 140(3),
726–743 (2021)
Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S.: Interpreting factor models. J. Finance 73(3), 1183–1223 (2018)
Lewellen, J.: Momentum and autocorrelation in stock returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 15(2), 533–564 (2002)
Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., Shanken, J.: A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. J. Financ. Econ. 96(2),
175–194 (2010)
Liu, Y ., Tsyvinski, A., Wu, X.: Common risk factors in cryptocurrency. J. Finance77(2), 1133–1177 (2022)

ken, J.: A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. J. Financ. Econ. 96(2),
175–194 (2010)
Liu, Y ., Tsyvinski, A., Wu, X.: Common risk factors in cryptocurrency. J. Finance77(2), 1133–1177 (2022)
Miffre, J., Rallis, G.: Momentum strategies in commodity futures markets. J. Bank. Finance 31(6), 1863–
1886 (2007)
Moreira, A., Muir, T.: V olatility-managed portfolios. J. Finance 72(4), 1611–1644 (2017)
Moskowitz, T.J., Grinblatt, M.: Do industries explain momentum? J. Finance 54(4), 1249–1290 (1999)
Moskowitz, T.J., Ooi, Y .H., Pedersen, L.H.: Time series momentum. J. Financ. Econ. 104(2), 228–250
(2012)
Novy-Marx, R.: Is momentum really momentum? J. Financ. Econ. 103(3), 429–453 (2012)
Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R.F.: Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. J. Polit. Econ. 111(3), 642–685
(2003)
Ross, S.A.: The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. J. Econ. Theory 13, 341–360 (1976)
Rouwenhorst, K.G.: International momentum strategies. J. Finance 53(1), 267–284 (1998)
Sagi, J.S., Seasholes, M.S.: Firm-speciﬁc attributes and the cross-section of momentum. J. Financ. Econ.
84(2), 389–434 (2007)
Zhang, S.: Dissecting currency momentum. J. Financ. Econ. 144(1), 154–173 (2022)
Zhang, X.F.: Information uncertainty and stock returns. J. Finance 61(1), 105–137 (2006)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.

uncertainty and stock returns. J. Finance 61(1), 105–137 (2006)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
Tobias Wiest is currently a PhD candidate and research assistant at the School of Finance of the Uni-
versity of St. Gallen, Switzerland. His research interests are empirical asset pricing and mutual funds
123

114 T. Wiest
with a special focus on equity factors and derivatives. Mr. Wiest holds a Master’s degree in Banking and
Finance from the University of St. Gallen and a Bachelor’s degree in Global Business Management from
the University of Augsburg. He gained practical experience through internships at UBS, Assenagon Asset
Management, and PricewaterhouseCoopers.
123
