Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Papers
Number 874
September 2006
Informed and Strategic Order Flow in the Bond Markets
Paolo Pasquariello and Clara Vega
NOTE: International Finance Discussion Papers are preliminary materials circulated to stimulate discussion
and critical comment. References in publications to International Finance Discussion Papers (other than an
acknowledgment that the writer has had access to unpublished material) should be cleared with the author
or authors. Recent IFDPs are available on the Web at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/.

Informed and Strategic Order Flow in the Bond Markets
Paolo Pasquariello and Clara Vega*
Abstract
We study the role played by private and public info rmation in the process of price formation in the U.S.
Treasury bond market. To guide our analysis, we develop a parsimonious model of speculative trading in the
presence of two realistic market frictions – info rmation heterogeneity and imperfect competition among
informed traders – and a public signal. We test its equilibrium implications by analyzing the response of two-
year, five-year, and ten-year U.S. bond yields to order flow and real-time U.S. macroeconomic news. We find
strong evidence of informational effects in the U.S. Treasury bond market: unanticipated order flow has a
significant and permanent imp act on daily bond yield chang es during both announcement and non-
announcement days. Our analysis further shows that, consistent with our stylized model, the contemporaneous
correlation between order flow and yield changes is higher when the dispersion of beliefs among market
participants is high and public announcements are noisy.
JEL Classification: E44; G14
Keywords: Treasury Bond Markets; Macroeconomic News Announcements; Strategic Trading; Market
Microstructure; Order Flow; Real-Time Data; Expectations; Dispersion of Beliefs
* Pasquariello is affiliated with the department of Finance at the Ross School of Business at University of

ing; Market
Microstructure; Order Flow; Real-Time Data; Expectations; Dispersion of Beliefs
* Pasquariello is affiliated with the department of Finance at the Ross School of Business at University of
Michigan and Vega is affiliated with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemthe and the
University of Rochester Simon School of Business. Please address comments to the authors via email at
ppasquar@bus.umich.edu
 and vega@simon.rochester.edu. We benefitted from the comments of Sreedhar
Bharath, Michael Brandt, Michael Fleming, Clifton Green, Nejat Seyhun, Guojun Wu, Kathy Yuan, and other
participants in seminars at the 2005 European Finance Association meetings in Moscow, the 2006 Bank of
Canada Fixed Income Markets conference in Otta wa, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, George
Washington University, the University of Maryland, the University of Michigan, the University of Rochester,
and the University of Utah. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not
be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any
other person associated with the Federal Reserve System.

1 Introduction
Identifying the causes of daily asset price movements remains a puzzling issue in ﬁnance. In a
frictionless market, asset prices should immediately adjust to public news surprises. Hence, we
should observe price jumps only during announcement times. However, asset prices ﬂuctuate
signiﬁcantly during non-announcement days as well. This fact has motivated the introduction
of various market frictions to better explain the behavior of asset prices. One possible friction
is asymmetric information.
1 When sophisticated agents trade, their private information is (par-
tially) revealed to the market, via order ﬂow, causing revisions in asset prices even in the absence
of public announcements.
The goal of this paper is to theoretically identify and empirically measure the e ﬀect of these
two complementary mechanisms responsible for daily price changes: aggregation of public news
and aggregation of order ﬂow. In particular, we assess the relevance of each mechanism condi-
tional on the dispersion of beliefs among traders and the public signals’ noise.
To guide our analysis, we develop a parsimonious model of speculative trading in the spirit
of Kyle (1985). The model builds upon two realisti c market frictions: information heterogeneity
and imperfect competition among informed trader s (henceforth, speculators). In this setting,
more diverse information among speculators leads to lower equilibrium market liquidity, since

terogeneity
and imperfect competition among informed trader s (henceforth, speculators). In this setting,
more diverse information among speculators leads to lower equilibrium market liquidity, since
their trading activity is more cautious than if they were homogeneously informed, thus making
the market-makers more vulnerable to adverse selection. W e then introduce a public signal
and derive equilibrium prices and trading strategies on announcement and non-announcement
days. The contribution of the model is twofold. To our knowledge, it provides a novel theoretical
analysis of the relationship between the trading activity of heterogeneously informed, imperfectly
competitive speculators, the availability and quality of public information, and market liquidity.
Furthermore, its analytically tractable closed-form solution, in terms of elementary functions,
generates several explicit and empirically testable implications on the nature of that relationship.
2
1 According to Goodhart and O’Hara (1997, p. 102), “one pu zzle in the study of asset markets, either nationally
or internationally, is that so little of the movements in such markets can be ascribed to identi ﬁed public ‘news’.
In domestic (equity) markets this ﬁnding is often attributed to private infor mation being revealed.” This friction
has been recently studied by Brandt and Kavajecz ( 2004) and Green (2004) in the U.S. Treasury bond market,

kets this ﬁnding is often attributed to private infor mation being revealed.” This friction
has been recently studied by Brandt and Kavajecz ( 2004) and Green (2004) in the U.S. Treasury bond market,
by Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) and Evans and Lyo ns (2002, 2003, 2004) in the foreign exchange market, by
Berry and Howe (1994) in the U.S. stock market, and by Br enner, Pasquariello, and Subrahmanyam (2005) in
the U.S. corporate bond market, among others.
2 Foster and Viswanathan (1996) and Back, Cao, and Willard (2000) extend Kyle (1985) to analyze the impact
of competition among heterogeneously informed traders on market liquidity and price volatility in discrete-time
and continuous-time models of intraday trading, resp ectively. Foster and Viswanathan (1993) show that, when
the beliefs of perfectly informed traders are represented by elliptically contoured distributions, price volatility
and trading volume depend on the surprise component of public information. Yet, neither model’s equilibrium
is in closed-form, except the (analytically intractabl e) inverse incomplete gamma function in Back et al. (2000).
Hence, their implications are sensitive to the chosen cal ibration parameters. Further, neither model, by its
dynamic nature, generates unambiguous comparative sta tics for the impact of information heterogeneity or the
1

In particular, we show that the availability of a public signal improves market liquidity (the more
so the lower that signal’s volatility) since its presence reduces the adverse selection risk for the
market-makers and mitigates the quasi-monopolistic behavior of the speculators.
This model is not asset-speci ﬁc, i.e., it applies to stock, bond, and foreign exchange markets.
In this study, we test its implications for the U.S. government bond market for three reasons.
First, Treasury market data contains signed trades; thus, we do not need to rely on algorithms
(e.g., Lee and Ready, 1991) that add measurement error to our estimates of order ﬂow. Second,
government bond markets represent the simplest trading environment to analyze price changes
while avoiding omitted variable biases. For example, most theories predict an unambiguous link
between macroeconomic fundamentals and bond yield changes, with unexpected increases in real
activity and in ﬂation raising bond yields (e.g., Fleming and Remolona, 1997; Balduzzi, Elton,
and Green, 2001, among others). In contrast, the link between macroeconomic fundamentals and
the stock market is less clear (e.g., Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega, 2004; Boyd, Hu,
and Jagannathan, 2005). Third, the market for Treasury securities is interesting in itself since it
is among the largest, most liquid U.S. ﬁnancial markets.
Our empirical results strongly support the main implications of our model. During non-

r Treasury securities is interesting in itself since it
is among the largest, most liquid U.S. ﬁnancial markets.
Our empirical results strongly support the main implications of our model. During non-
announcement days, adverse selection costs of unanticipated order ﬂow are higher when the
dispersion of beliefs – measured by the standard deviation of professional forecasts of macroe-
conomic news releases – is high. For instance, we estimate that a one standard deviation shock
to abnormal order ﬂow decreases two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year bond yields by 7.19, 10.04,
and 6.84 basis points, respectively, on high dispersion days compared to 4.08, 4.07,a n d 2.86
basis points on low dispersion days. These di ﬀerences are economically and statistically signif-
icant. Consistently, these higher adverse selection costs translate into higher contemporaneous
correlation between order ﬂow changes and bond yield changes. For example, the adjusted R
2 of
regressing daily ﬁve-year Treasury bond yield changes on unanticipated order ﬂow is 41.38% on
high dispersion days compared to 9.65% on low dispersion days. Intuitively, when information
heterogeneity is high, the speculators’ quasi-monopolistic trading behavior leads to a “cautious”
equilibrium where changes in unanticipated order ﬂow have a greater impact on bond yields.
The release of a public signal, a trade-free source of information about fundamentals, induces

a “cautious”
equilibrium where changes in unanticipated order ﬂow have a greater impact on bond yields.
The release of a public signal, a trade-free source of information about fundamentals, induces
the speculators to trade more aggressively on their private information. Accordingly, weﬁnd that
the correlation between unanticipated order ﬂow and day-to-day bond yield changes is lower
during announcement days. For example, comparing non-announcement days with Nonfarm
Payroll Employment release dates, the explanatory power of order ﬂow decreases from 15.31%
to 6.47%, 21.03% to 19.61%,a n d 6.74% to 3.59% for the two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year bonds,
respectively. Yet, when both the dispersion of beliefs and the noise of the public signal –
measured as the absolute di ﬀerence between the actual announcement and its last revision –
a r eh i g h ,t h ei m p o r t a n c eo fo r d e rﬂow in setting bond prices increases. All of the above results
availability of public information on market liquidity. F inally, neither model can be easily generalized to allow
for both a public signal of the traded asset’s payo ﬀ and less than perfectly correlated private information.
2

are robust to alternative measures of the dispersion of beliefs among market participants, as well
as to di ﬀerent regression speci ﬁcations and the inclusion of di ﬀerent control variables. Lastly,
our evidence cannot be attributed to transient inventory or portfolio rebalancing considerations,
since the unanticipated government bond order ﬂow has a permanent impact on yield changes
during both announcement and non-announcement days in the sample.
Our paper is most closely related to two recent studies of order ﬂow in the U.S. Treasury mar-
ket. Brandt and Kavajecz (2004) ﬁnd that order ﬂow accounts for up to 26% of the variation in
yields on days without major macroeconomic announcements. Green (2004) examines the e ﬀect
of order ﬂow on intraday bond price changes surrounding U.S. macroeconomic news announce-
ments. W e extend both studies by identifying a theoretical and empirical link between the price
discovery role of order ﬂow and the degree of information heterogeneity among investors and the
quality of macroeconomic data releases. In particular, we document important e ﬀects of both
dispersion of beliefs and public signal noise on the correlation between daily bond yield changes
and order ﬂow during announcement and non-announcement days. This evidence complements
the weak e ﬀects reported by Green (2004) over thirty-minute intervals around news releases.
Since the econometrician does not observe the precise arrival time of private information signals,

lements
the weak e ﬀects reported by Green (2004) over thirty-minute intervals around news releases.
Since the econometrician does not observe the precise arrival time of private information signals,
narrowing the estimation window may lead to underestimating the e ﬀect of dispersion of beliefs
on market liquidity.
3
Our work also belongs to the literature bridging the gap between asset pricing and market
microstructure. Evans and Lyons (2003) ﬁnd that signed order ﬂow is a good predictor of
subsequent exchange rate movements; Brandt and Kavajecz (2004) show that this is true for
bond market movements; Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) argue that the probability of
informed trading (PIN), a function of order ﬂow, is a priced ﬁrm characteristic in stock returns.
These studies enhance our understanding of the determinants of asset price movements, but do
not provide any evidence on the determinants of orderﬂow. Evans and Lyons (2004) address this
issue by showing that foreign exchange order ﬂow predicts future macroeconomic surprises, i.e.,
it conveys information about fundamentals. W e go a step further in linking the impact of order
ﬂow on bond prices to macroeconomic uncertainty (public signal noise) and the heterogeneity of
beliefs about real shocks.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we construct a stylized model of trading to guide our
empirical analysis. In Section 3, we describe th e data. In Section 4, we present the empirical
results. W e conclude in Section 5.

In Section 2, we construct a stylized model of trading to guide our
empirical analysis. In Section 3, we describe th e data. In Section 4, we present the empirical
results. W e conclude in Section 5.
3 For instance, heterogeneously informed investors ma y not trade immediately after public news are released
but instead wait to preserve (and explo it) their informational advantage as long (and as much) as possible, as in
Foster and Viswanathan (1996).
3

2T h e o r e t i c a l M o d e l
In this section we motivate our investigation of the impact of the dispersion of beliefs among
sophisticated market participants and the release of macroeconomic news on the informational
role of trading. W eﬁrst describe a one-shot version of the multi-period model of trading of Foster
and Viswanathan (1996) and derive closed-form solutions for the equilibrium market depth and
trading volume. Then, we enrich the model by introducing a public signal and consider its
implications for the equilibrium price and trading strategies. All proofs are in the Appendix
unless otherwise noted.
2.1 Benchmark: No Public Signal
The basic model is a two-date, one-period eco nomy in which a single risky asset is exchanged.
Trading occurs only at the end of the period ( t =1 ), after which the asset payo ﬀ, a normally
distributed random variable v with mean zero and variance σ2
v,i sr e a l i z e d . T h ee c o n o m yi s
populated by three types of risk-neutral traders: a discrete number ( M) of informed traders
(that we label speculators), liquidity traders, an d perfectly competitive market-makers (MMs).
All traders know the structure of the economy and the decision process leading to order ﬂow and
prices.
At time t =0 there is neither information asymmetry aboutv nor trading. Sometime between
t =0 and t =1 , each speculator k receives a private and noisy signal of v, Svk .W e a s s u m e

w and
prices.
At time t =0 there is neither information asymmetry aboutv nor trading. Sometime between
t =0 and t =1 , each speculator k receives a private and noisy signal of v, Svk .W e a s s u m e
that the resulting signal vector Sv is drawn from a multivariate normal distribution (MND) with
mean zero and covariance matrix Σs such that var (Svk )= σ2
s and cov (Svk ,S vj )= σss.W e a l s o
impose that the speculators together know the liquidation value of the risky asset: PM
k=1 Svk = v;
therefore, cov (v, Svk )= σ2
v
M . This speci ﬁcation makes the total amount of information available to
the speculators independent from the correlation of their private signals, albeit still implying the
most general information structure up to rescaling by a constant (see Foster and Viswanathan,
1996).
These assumptions imply that δ
k ≡ E (v|Svk )= σ2
v
Mσ2s
Svk and E (δj |δk)= γδk,w h e r eγ = σss
σ2s
is the correlation between any two private information endowments δk and δj .A s i n F o s t e r
and Viswanathan (1996), we parametrize the degree of diversity among speculators’ signals by
requiring that σ
2
s − σss = χ ≥ 0. This restriction ensures that Σs is positive de ﬁnite. If χ =0 ,
then speculators’ private information is homogeneous: All speculators receive the same signal
Svk = v
M such that σ2
s = σss = σ2
v
M2 and γ =1 .I f χ = σ2
v
M , then speculators’ information is
heterogeneous: σ2
s = χ, σss =0 ,a n d γ =0 . Otherwise, speculators’ signals are only partially

l
Svk = v
M such that σ2
s = σss = σ2
v
M2 and γ =1 .I f χ = σ2
v
M , then speculators’ information is
heterogeneous: σ2
s = χ, σss =0 ,a n d γ =0 . Otherwise, speculators’ signals are only partially
correlated: Indeed, γ ∈ (0, 1) if χ ∈
³
0, σ2
v
M
´
and γ ∈
¡
− 1
M−1 , 0
¢
if χ > σ2
v
M .4
4 The assumption that the total amount of information available to speculators is ﬁxed (PM
k=1 Svk = v) implies
that σ2
s = σ2
v +M(M−1)χ
M2 and σss = σ2
v −Mχ
M2 , hence γ = σ2
v −Mχ
σ2v +M(M−1)χ . Further, the absolute bound to the largest
4

At time t =1 , both speculators and liquidity traders submit their orders to the MMs, before
the equilibrium price p1 has been set. W e de ﬁne the market order of the kth speculator to be
xk.T h u s , h e r p r oﬁti sg i v e nb yπk (xk,p 1)=( v − p1) xk. Liquidity traders generate a random,
normally distributed demand u, with mean zero and variance σ2
u. For simplicity, we assume that
u is independent from all other random variables. MMs do not receive any information, but
observe the aggregate order ﬂow ω1 = PM
k=1 xk + u from all market participants and set the
market-clearing price p1 = p1 (ω1).
2.1.1 Equilibrium
Consistently with Kyle (1985), we deﬁne a Bayesian Nash equilibrium as a set of M +1 functions
x1 (·) ,... ,x M (·),a n d p1 (·) such that the following two conditions hold:
1. Proﬁt maximization: xk (Svk )=a r g m a xE (πk|Svk );
2. Semi-strong market eﬃciency: p1 (ω1)= E (v|ω1).
W e restrict our attention to linear equilibria. W e ﬁrst conjecture general linear functions
for the pricing rule and speculators’ demands. W e then solve for their parameters satisfying
conditions 1 and 2. Finally, we show that these parameters and those functions represent a
rational expectations equilibrium. The following proposition accomplishes this task.
Proposition 1 There exists a unique linear equilibrium given by the price function
p
1 = λω1 (1)
and by the kth speculator’s demand strategy
xk = λ−1
2+( M − 1) γ δk, (2)
where λ = σ2
v
σuσs
√
M[2+(M−1)γ] > 0.

n 1 There exists a unique linear equilibrium given by the price function
p
1 = λω1 (1)
and by the kth speculator’s demand strategy
xk = λ−1
2+( M − 1) γ δk, (2)
where λ = σ2
v
σuσs
√
M[2+(M−1)γ] > 0.
The optimal trading strategy of each speculator depends on the information she receives
about the asset payo ﬀ (v) and on the depth of the market ( λ−1). If M =1 ,E q s . ( 1 )a n d
(2) reduce to the well-known equilibrium of Kyle (1985). The speculators, albeit risk-neutral,
exploit their private information cautiously (|x
k| < ∞), to avoid dissipating their informational
advantage with their trades. Thus, the equilibrium market liquidity in p1 reﬂects MMs’ attempt
to be compensated for the losses they anticipate from trading with speculators, as it a ﬀects their
proﬁts from liquidity trading.
negative private signal correlation γ compatible with a positive de ﬁnite Σs,
¯¯¯− 1
M−1
¯¯¯, is a decreasing function of
M .
5

2.1.2 T estable Implications
The intuition behind the parsimonious equilibrium of Eqs. (1) and (2) is similar to that in
the multi-period models of Foster and Viswan athan (1996) and Back et al. (2000). Yet, its
closed-form solution (in Proposition 1) translates that intuition into unambiguous predictions
on the impact of information heterogeneity on market depth.
5 The optimal market orders xk
depend on the number of speculators ( M) and the correlation among their information endow-
ments (γ). The intensity of competition among speculators a ﬀects their ability to maintain the
informativeness of the order ﬂow as low as possible. A greater number of speculators trade more
aggressively – i.e., their aggregate amount of trading is higher – since (imperfect) competition
among them precludes any collusive trading strategy. For instance, when M> 1 speculators
are homogeneously informed (γ =1 ), then x
k = σu
σv
√
M v, which implies that the ﬁnite diﬀerence
4Mxk =( M +1 ) xk − Mxk = σu
σv
³√
M +1 −
√
M
´
v> 0. This behavior reduces the adverse
selection problem for the MMs, thus leading to greater market liquidity (lower λ).
The heterogeneity of speculators’ signals attenuates their trading aggressiveness. When in-
formation is less correlated ( γ closer to zero), each speculator has some monopoly power on her
signal, because at least part of it is known exclusively to her. Hence, as a group, they trade

hen in-
formation is less correlated ( γ closer to zero), each speculator has some monopoly power on her
signal, because at least part of it is known exclusively to her. Hence, as a group, they trade
more cautiously – i.e., their aggregate amount of trading is lower – to reveal less of their
own information endowments δ
k. For example, when M> 1 speculators are he terogeneously
informed (γ =0 ), then xk = σu
σv
Svk , which implies that PM
k=1 xk = σu
σv
v< σuM
σv
√
M v, i.e., lower than
the aggregate amount of trading by M> 1 homogeneously informed speculators ( γ =1 )b u t
identical to the trade of a monopolistic speculator ( M =1 ). This “quasi-monopolistic” behavior
makes the MMs more vulnerable to adverse selection, thus the market less liquid (higherλ). The
following corollary summarizes the ﬁrst set of empirical implications of our model.
Corollary 1 Equilibrium market liquidity is increasing in the number of speculators and decreas-
ing in the heterogeneity of their information endowments.
To gain further insight on this result, we construct a simple numerical example by setting
σv = σu =1 . W e then vary the parameter χ to study the liquidity of this market with respect
to a broad range of sig nal correlations γ (from very highly negative to very highly positive)
when M =1 , 2,a n d 4. By construction, both the private signals’ variance ( σ2
s)a n dc o v a r i a n c e
(σss) change with χ and M, yet the total amount of information available to the speculators is

en M =1 , 2,a n d 4. By construction, both the private signals’ variance ( σ2
s)a n dc o v a r i a n c e
(σss) change with χ and M, yet the total amount of information available to the speculators is
unchanged. W e plot the resulting λ in Figure 1A. Multiple, perfectly heterogeneously informed
speculators (γ =0 ) collectively trade as cautiously as a monopolist speculator. Under these
circumstances, adverse selection is at its highest, and market liquidity at its lowest ( λ = σv
2σu ).
A greater number of competing speculators improves market depth, but signi ﬁcantly so only
if accompanied by more correlated private signals. However, ceteris paribus, the improvement
5 This contrasts with the numerical examples of the dynamics of market depth reported in Foster and
Viswanathan (1996, Figure 1C) and Back et al. (2000, Figure 3A).
6

in market liquidity is more pronounced (and informed trading less cautious) when speculators’
private signals are negatively correlated. When γ < 0, each speculator expects her competitors’
trades to be negatively correlated to her own (pushing p1 against her signal), hence trading on
it to be more pro ﬁtable.
2.2 Extension: A Public Signal
W e now extend the basic model of Section 2.1 by providing each player with an additional,
common source of information about the risky asset before trading takes place. According to Kim
and Verrecchia (1994, p. 43), “public disclosure has received little explicit attention in theoretical
m o d e l sw h o s em a j o rf o c u si su n d e r s t a n d i n gm a r k e tl i q u i d i t y . ”
6 More speciﬁcally, we assume that,
sometime between t =0 and t =1 , both the speculators and the MMs also observe a public
and noisy signal Sp of the asset payoﬀ v. This signal is normally distributed with mean zero and
variance σ2
p > σ2
v.W e c a n t h i n k o fSp as any surprise public announcement (e.g., macroeconomic
news) released simultaneously to all market participants. W e further impose thatcov (Sp,v )= σ2
v,
so that the parameter σ2
p controls for the quality of the public signal and cov (Sp,S vk )= σ2
v
M .T h e
private information endowment of each speculator is then given byδ∗
k ≡ E (v|Svk ,S p)−E (v|Sp)=
αSvk + βSp,w h e r e α =
Mσ2
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
> 0 and β = −
σ4
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2p{[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v } < 0.T h u s ,

h speculator is then given byδ∗
k ≡ E (v|Svk ,S p)−E (v|Sp)=
αSvk + βSp,w h e r e α =
Mσ2
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
> 0 and β = −
σ4
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2p{[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v } < 0.T h u s ,
E
¡
δ∗
j |δ∗
k
¢
= E
¡
δ∗
j |Svk ,S p
¢
= γpδ∗
k,w h e r eγp =
Mα2σss+2αβσ2
v +Mβ2σ2
p
Mα2σ2s +2αβσ2v +Mβ2σ2p
≤ γ.
2.2.1 Equilibrium
Again we search for linear equilibria. The following proposition summarizes our results.
Proposition 2 There exists a unique linear equilibrium given by the price function
p1 = λpω1 + λsSp (3)
and by the kth speculator’s demand strategy
xk = λ−1
p
2+( M − 1) γp
δ∗
k, (4)
where λp =
α
1
2 σv (σ2
p−σ2
v )
1
2
σuσp[2+(M−1)γp] > 0 and λs = σ2
v
σ2p
.
6 Admati and P ﬂeiderer (1988) and Foster and Viswanathan (1990) consider dynamic models of intraday
trading in which the private information of either perfect ly competitive insiders or a monopolistic insider is either
fully or partially revealed by the end of the trading period. McKelvey and Page (1990) provide experimental
evidence that individuals make inferences from publicly av ailable information using Bayesian updating. Diamond
and Verrecchia (1991) argue that the disclosure of public information may reduce the volatility of the order ﬂow,
leading some market makers to exit. Kim and Verrecchi a (1994) show that, in the absence of better informed
agents but in the presence of better information processo rs with homogeneous priors, the arrival of a public signal

s to exit. Kim and Verrecchi a (1994) show that, in the absence of better informed
agents but in the presence of better information processo rs with homogeneous priors, the arrival of a public signal
leads to greater information asymm etry and lower market liquidity.
7

The optimal trading strategy of each speculator in Eq. (4) mirrors that of Proposition 1
(Eq. (2)), yet it now depends only on δ∗
k, the truly private – hence less correlated ( γp ≤ γ)–
component of speculator k’s original private signal (Svk ) in the presence of a public signal of v.
Hence, the MMs’ belief update aboutv stemming from Sp makes speculators’ private information
less valuable. The resulting equilibrium price p1 in Eq. (3) can be rewritten as
p1 = α
2+( M − 1) γp
v + λpu +
·
λs + Mβ
2+( M − 1) γp
¸
Sp.( 5 )
According to Eq. (5), the public signal impacts p1 through two channels that (in the spirit of
Evans and Lyons, 2003) we call direct, related to MMs’ belief updating process ( λs > 0), and
indirect, via the speculators’ trading activity ( β < 0). Since λs
£
2+( M − 1) γp
¤
> −Mβ > 0,
the former always dominates the latter. Therefore, public news always enter the equilibrium
price with the “right” sign.
2.2.2 Additional T estable Implications
Foster and Viswanathan (1993) generalize the t rading model of Kyle (1985) to distributions
of the elliptically contoured class (ECC) and show that, in the presence of a discrete number
of identically informed traders, the unexpected realization of a public signal has no impact on
market liquidity regardless of the ECC used. This is the case for the equilibrium of Proposition
2 as well.
7 Nonetheless, Proposition 2 allows us to study the impact of the availability of noisy

on
market liquidity regardless of the ECC used. This is the case for the equilibrium of Proposition
2 as well.
7 Nonetheless, Proposition 2 allows us to study the impact of the availability of noisy
public information on equilibrium market depth in the presence of imperfectly competitive and
heterogeneously informed speculators. To our knowledge, this analysis is novel to the ﬁnancial
literature. W e start with the following result.
Corollary 2 The availability of a public signal of v increases equilibrium market liquidity.
The availability of the public signal Sp reduces the adverse selection risk for the MMs, thus
increasing the depth of this stylized market, for two reasons. First, the public signal represents
an additional, trade-free source of information about v. Second, speculators have to trade more
aggressively to extract rents from their private information. In Figure 1B we plot the ensuing
gain in liquidity, λ − λ
p, as a function of private signal correlations γ when the public signal’s
noise σp =1 .25, i.e., by varying χ and M (so σ2
s and σss as well, but not the total amount
of information available to the speculators) as in Figure 1A. The increase in market depth is
greater when γ is negative and the number of speculators ( M) is high. In those circumstances,
the availability of a public signal reinforces speculators’ existing incentives to place market orders
on their private signals S
vk more aggressively. However, greaterσ2

igh. In those circumstances,
the availability of a public signal reinforces speculators’ existing incentives to place market orders
on their private signals S
vk more aggressively. However, greaterσ2
p, ceteris paribus, increases λp,
since the poorer quality of Sp (lower information-to-noise ratioσ2
v
σ2p
) induces the MMs to rely more
heavily on ω1 to set market-clearing prices, hence the speculators to trade less aggressively.
7 Speciﬁcally, it can be shown that the one-shot equilibrium in Foster and Viswanathan (1993, Proposition 1)
is a special case of our Proposition 2 when private signal correlations γ =1 for any ECC.
8

Remark 1 (The increase in) market liquidity is decreasing in the volatility of the public signal.
In the presence of a public signal, information heterogeneity among speculators plays a more
ambiguous role on market liquidity. If the volatility of the public signal is low, heterogeneously
informed (thus more cautious) speculators put less weight on their private signals S
vk (lower
α in δ∗
k) and more weight on the public signal Sp (higher β in δ∗
k) when updating their beliefs
than homogeneously informed (thus more aggressive) speculators. Hence, the ensuing trading
behavior leads to less adverse selection risk for the MMs (lower λ
p). Vice versa, when σp is high,
speculators rely more heavily on their private signals, but more cautiously so if gamma is low,
leading to lower equilibrium market depth (higher λ
p), as in Corollary 1.
Remark 2 Information heterogeneity decreases market liquidity only when the volatility of the
public signal is “high.”
The volatility of the public signal Sp also a ﬀects its direct impact ( λs) on the equilibrium
price of Eq. (3). Everything else equal, the poorer is the quality of the public signal (higher σp),
the more the speculators rely on their private signals Svk (see Remark 1) and the MMs rely on
the aggregate order ﬂow ω1 to infer the asset payo ﬀ v. Consequently, the MMs put less weight
on Sp and more weight on ω1 in setting the market-clearing price p1, toward the benchmark of
Eq. (1): limσp→∞ λs =0 and limσp→∞ λp = λ.

infer the asset payo ﬀ v. Consequently, the MMs put less weight
on Sp and more weight on ω1 in setting the market-clearing price p1, toward the benchmark of
Eq. (1): limσp→∞ λs =0 and limσp→∞ λp = λ.
Corollary 3 The sensitivity of the equilibrium price to the public signal is decreasing in that
signal’s volatility.
3D a t a D e s c r i p t i o n
W e test the implications of the model presented in the previous section using U.S. Treasury
bond market data and U.S. macroeconomic announcements. As mentioned in Section 1, this
choice is motivated not only by the quality and availability of data on U.S. government bond
transactions, but also by the clear theoretical link between macroeconomic fundamentals and
bond yield changes.
3.1 Bond Market Data
W e use intraday U.S. Treasury bond yields, quotes, transactions, and signed trades for the
most recently issued, “on-the-run,” two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year Treasury notes. W e use
these “on-the-run” notes because, according to Fleming (1997), Brandt and Kavajecz (2004),
and Goldreich, Hanke, and Nath (2005), those are the securities with the greatest liquidity
and where the majority of informed trading ta kes place. W e are interested in studying the
informational role of bond trading related to m acroeconomic fundamentals. Therefore, we focus
9

on the intermediate to long maturities, since these are the most responsive to macroeconomic
aggregates (e.g., Balduzzi et al., 2001). Consistently, when we perform the analysis that follows
on the remaining “on-the-run” and “o ﬀ-the-run” Treasury securities in our database, we ﬁnd
that (i) the resulting inference for the former is weaker than the one described in the paper, and
(ii) order ﬂow has no impact on yield changes for the latter. These results are available upon
request from the authors.
We o b t a i n t he da t a f r o m Gov PX, aﬁrm that collects quote and trade information from six of
the seven main interdealer brokers (with the notable exception of Cantor Fitzgerald).
8 Fleming
(1997) argues that these six brokers account for approximately two-thirds of the interdealer-
broker market, which in turn translates into approximately 45% of the trading volume in the
secondary market for Treasury securities. Our sample includes every transaction taking place
during “regular trading hours,” from 7:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time (EST),
between January 2, 1992 and December 29, 2000. GovPX stopped recording intraday volume
afterward. Strictly speaking, the U.S. Treasury market is open 24 hours a day; yet, 95% of
the trading volume occurs duri ng those hours. Thus, to remove ﬂuctuations in bond yields due
to illiquidity, we ignore trades outside that narrower interval. Finally, the data contains some

, 95% of
the trading volume occurs duri ng those hours. Thus, to remove ﬂuctuations in bond yields due
to illiquidity, we ignore trades outside that narrower interval. Finally, the data contains some
interdealer brokers’ posting errors not previously ﬁltered out by GovPX. W e eliminate these
errors following the procedure described in Fleming’s (2003) appendix.
W e report summary statistics for the daily raw yield and transaction data in Table 1. Bond
yields are in percentage, i.e., were multiplied by 100; bond yield changes are in basis points,
i.e., were multiplied by 10, 000. Not surprisingly, mean Treasury bond yields are increasing with
maturity and display large positive ﬁrst-order autocorrelation ( ρ (1) > 0). Mean daily yield
changes are small or zero; yet, their sample variability suggests that economically important
ﬂuctuations of the yield curve took place over the sample period. Five-year Treasury notes are
characterized by the largest mean daily number of transactions (roughly 614), hence by the
highest liquidity, consistent with the ﬁndings of Fleming (2003), among others.
W e also compare (but do not report here for economy of space) daily bond yield changes during
days when one of the most closely observed U.S. macroeconomic announcement, the Nonfarm
Payroll Employment report, is released to daily bond yield changes during non-announcement
days.
9 Bond yield changes are clearly more volatile on days when the Payroll numbers are

ement, the Nonfarm
Payroll Employment report, is released to daily bond yield changes during non-announcement
days.
9 Bond yield changes are clearly more volatile on days when the Payroll numbers are
announced, but yield changes during non-announcement days are economically signi ﬁcant as
well. These dynamics, together with the poor performance of public macroeconomic surprises in
8 In our sample period (1992 to 2000), the major interdealer brokers in the U.S. Treasury market are Cantor
Fitzgerald Inc., Garban Ltd., Hilliard Farber & Co. Inc., Liberty Brokerage Inc., RMJ Securities Corp., and
Tullet and Tokyo Securities Inc. Cantor Fitzgerald’s share of the interdealer Treasury market is about 30% over
our sample period (Goldreich et al., 2005). Nevertheless, Cantor Fitzgerald is a dominant player only in the “long
end” of the Treasury yield curve, which we do not study in depth in this paper.
9 Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), among others, refer to the Nonfarm Payroll report as the “king” of announce-
ments because of the signi ﬁcant sensitivity of most asset markets to its release.
10

explaining ﬂuctuations in bond yields on non-announcement days, further motivate our study of
the price discovery role of order ﬂow when no public news arrive to the bond market.
3.2 Macroeconomic Data
3.2.1 Expected and Announced Fundamentals
W e use the International Money Market Services (MMS) Inc. real-time data on the expectations
and realizations of 25 of the most relevant U.S. macroeconomic fundamentals to estimate an-
nouncement surprises. Table 2 provides a brief description of the most salient characteristics of
U.S. economic news announcements in our sample: the total number of observations, the agency
reporting each announcement, the time of the announcement release, and whether the standard
deviation across professional forecasts is available. Fleming and Remolona (1997) and Andersen,
Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2003) discuss the main properties of MMS forecasts; Balduzzi et
al. (2001) show that these forecasts are not stale and unbiased.
We d eﬁne announcement surprises as the di ﬀerence between announcement realizations and
their corresponding expectations. More speci ﬁcally, since units of measurement vary across
macroeconomic variables, we standardize the resulting surprises by dividing each of them by
their sample standard deviation. The standardized news associated with the macroeconomic
indicator j at time t is therefore computed as
S
jt = Ajt − Ejt
bσj
,( 6 )
where Ajt is the announced value of indicator j, Ejt is its MMS median forecast, as a proxy

ssociated with the macroeconomic
indicator j at time t is therefore computed as
S
jt = Ajt − Ejt
bσj
,( 6 )
where Ajt is the announced value of indicator j, Ejt is its MMS median forecast, as a proxy
for its market expected value, and bσj is the sample standard deviation of Ajt − Ejt .E q .( 6 )
facilitates meaningful comparisons of responses of diﬀerent bond yield changes to diﬀerent pieces
of news. Operationally, we estimate those responses by regressing bond yield changes on news.
However, sincebσ
j is constant for any indicatorj, the standardization aﬀects neither the statistical
signiﬁcance of response estimates nor the ﬁt of the regressions.
3.2.2 Information Heterogeneity
W e use the MMS standard deviation across professional forecasts as a measure of dispersion
of beliefs across sophisticated investors. This measure of information heterogeneity is widely
adopted in the literature on investors’ reaction to information releases in the stock market (e.g.,
Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina, 2002; Kallberg and Pasquariello, 2004); Green (2004) recently
uses it in a bond market context. As indicated in Table 2, this variable is only available for 18
of the 25 macroeconomic news in our sample.
Overall, the dispersion of beliefs is large (e.g., roughly 22% on average of the mean absolute
monthly Nonfarm Payroll report), time-varying,and positively correlated across macroeconomic
11

announcements. To conserve space, we do not show the correlation matrix of all the announce-
ments, but only report (in Table 2) the pairwise correlation between each announcement and
arguably the most important of them, the Nonfar m Payroll report (e.g., Andersen and Boller-
slev, 1998; Andersen et al., 2004 ; Brenner et al., 2005). This correlation is positive, albeit not
statistically signiﬁcant for most of the announcements. Thus, dispersion of beliefs in Nonfarm
Payroll forecasts is not necessarily a good measure of information heterogeneity about the state
of the economy, which is ultimately what we are interested in. This motivates us to construct
three alternative measures of dispersion of beliefs during announcement and non-announcement
days: one based exclusively on the Payroll announcement, another based on 7 “inﬂuential” an-
nouncements (deﬁned below), and the last one based on the 18 announcements for which the
standard deviation of professional forecasts is available (i.e., those underlined in Table 2).
The use of the MMS database to calculate monthly measures of dispersion of beliefs raises
two issues: (i) the announcements in Table 2 are released at di ﬀerent frequencies and (ii) the
standard deviation of professional forecasts only measures heterogenous beliefs at the time of
the announcement. W e address these issues by assuming that the dispersion of beliefs remains
constant between announcements.

f professional forecasts only measures heterogenous beliefs at the time of
the announcement. W e address these issues by assuming that the dispersion of beliefs remains
constant between announcements. This assumption is empirically justi ﬁed since the ﬁrst order
autocorrelation in the standard deviation of professional forecasts ( ρ (1) in Table 2) is positive
and mostly statistically signiﬁcant. Hence, if the dispersion of beliefs across investors is high in
one month (week or quarter), it is likely to remain high in the next month (week or quarter).
To convert weekly and quarterly dispersions to a monthly frequency we use the following
procedure. For the single weekly announcement in the sample, Initial Unemployment Claims, we
average the dispersion of beliefs across four weeks. For the three quarterly announcements in the
sample, GDP Advance, Preliminary, and Final, we assume that the dispersion of beliefs in the
ﬁrst month of the quarter is constant throughout the quarter. The dispersion of beliefs of monthly
announcements is instead left unchanged and assumed to be constant between announcements.
W e then deﬁne our monthly proxy for the aggregate degree of information heterogeneity about
macroeconomic fundamentals as a weighted sum of monthly dispersions across announcements,
SSD
Pt =
XP
j=1
SDjt − bµ(SDjt )
bσ(SDjt ) ,( 7 )
where SDjt is the standard deviation of announcementj across professional forecasts andbµ(SDjt )

ted sum of monthly dispersions across announcements,
SSD
Pt =
XP
j=1
SDjt − bµ(SDjt )
bσ(SDjt ) ,( 7 )
where SDjt is the standard deviation of announcementj across professional forecasts andbµ(SDjt )
and bσ(SDjt ) are its sample mean and standard deviation, respectively. P is equal to 1 when we
only use the Nonfarm Payroll Employment to compute our measure of dispersion of beliefs. P
is equal to 7 when we use the following “in ﬂuential” macroeconomic announcements: Nonfarm
Payroll Employment, Retail Sales, New Home Sales, Consumer Conﬁdence Index, NAPM Index,
Index of Leading Indicators, and Initial Unemployment Claims.10 Lastly, P is equal to 18 when
10 In unreported analysis, we show that these announcements represent the most important information events
in the U.S. Treasury Market, i.e., the only ones having a statistically signi ﬁcant impact on day-to-day bond yield
changes, consistent with Fleming a nd Remolona (1997), among others.
12

we use all the announcements for which the measure SSDPt is available in our sample (i.e., those
underlined in Table 2). The standardization in Eq. (7) is necessary because, as we mentioned
earlier, units of measurement diﬀer across economic variables.
W e use the monthly dispersion estimates from these three methodologies to classify days in
which the corresponding monthly variable SSDPt is above (below) the top (bottom) 70th (30th )
percentile of its empirical distribution as days with high (low) information heterogeneity. The
resulting time series of high ( +1)a n dl o w(−1) dispersion days are positively correlated: Their
correlations (not reported here) range from 0.37 (between the Payroll-based series, P =1 ,a n d
the series constructed with the in ﬂuential announcements, P =7 )t o 0.70 (between the series
using all announcements,P =1 8, and the one based only on the inﬂuential news releases,P =7 ).
Finally, we report in Table 3 the di ﬀerences in the mean daily number of transactions ( NT
t)
in the two, ﬁve, and ten-year Treasury bond markets across days with high ( bh)a n dl o w( bl)
dispersion of beliefs measured with the three alternative methods described above. The corre-
sponding t statistics are computed using Newey-W est standard errors, because Table 1 shows that
the number of daily transactions is positively autocorrelated. Consistent with Gri ﬃth, Smith,
Turnbull, and White (2000) and Ranaldo (2004), among others (but also with the spirit of the

shows that
the number of daily transactions is positively autocorrelated. Consistent with Gri ﬃth, Smith,
Turnbull, and White (2000) and Ranaldo (2004), among others (but also with the spirit of the
model of Section 2), we interpret a big (small) number of daily transactions as a proxy for a high
(low) degree of trading aggressiveness. The ensuing diﬀerences are economically and statistically
signiﬁcant: fewer transactions take place in high dispersion days than in low dispersion days
(i.e., b
h − bl < 0). Consistently, Spearman correlations between NTt and either SSD1t, SSD7t,
or SSD18t (not reported here) are always negative for all maturities and mostly statistically sig-
niﬁcant. This evidence provides support for the ba sic intuition of our model and gives us further
conﬁdence in the heterogeneity proxies of Eq. (7), since it suggests that, in the government bond
market, periods of greater dispersion of beliefs among market participants are accompanied by
more cautious speculative trading activity, as argued in Section 2.1.1.
3.2.3 News or Noise?
The U.S. government often revises previously re leased macroeconomic information. Aruoba
(2004) identiﬁes these data revisions as either “informative,” i.e., due to newly available infor-
mation, or “uninformative,” i.e., due to de ﬁnitional changes (such as changes in the base-year
or changes in seasonal weights). In this paper, we use the former revisions to measure public
signal noise.

ion, or “uninformative,” i.e., due to de ﬁnitional changes (such as changes in the base-year
or changes in seasonal weights). In this paper, we use the former revisions to measure public
signal noise. Speciﬁcally, we use the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia “Real Time Data Set”
(RTDS), which records not only real-time macroeconomic announcements but also their subse-
quent revisions.
11 Of the 18 announcements in Table 2 for which MMS forecasts are available, the
RDTS contains monthly data on Capacity Utilization, Industrial Production, and Nonfarm Pay-
roll Employment report. The only variable undergoing “uninformative” changes over the sample
11 See Croushore and Stark (1999, 2001) for details of this da tabase and examples of empirical applications.
The database is publicly available on the internet at http://www.phil.frb.org/econ/forecast/reaindex.html.
13

period is Industrial Production, whose base-year was revised in February 1998. According to
extant literature (e.g., Mork, 1987; Faust, Rogers, and W right, 2003; Aruoba, 2004), (i) the ﬁnal
published revision of each actual announcement represents the most accurate measure for the
corresponding macroeconomic variable, and (ii) those revisions should be interpreted as noise,
for they are predictable (based on past information).
12 Hence, we measure public news noise as
the di ﬀerence between each initial announcement and its last revision. Since what matters in
our model is the magnitude of the noise ( σ2
p of Section 2.2), not its direction, we use the absolute
v a l u eo ft h i sd iﬀerence in our empirical analysis.
Consistent with Aruoba (2004), the resulting time series of simple and absolute macroeco-
nomic data revisions – i.e., the simple and absolute di ﬀerences between the real-time announce-
ment and the ﬁnal revision for Capacity Utilization, Industrial Production, and Nonfarm Payroll
Employment – display a few spikes and are often negative, revealing a tendency for the gov-
ernment to be overly conservative in its initial announcements. Interestingly, the absolute value
of the measurement error tends to be positively correlated with the volatility of the underlying
announcement, with correlations (not reported here) varying between a low of 0.18 (Industrial
Production) and a high of 0.52 ( N o n f a r mP a y r o l l ) .

ated with the volatility of the underlying
announcement, with correlations (not reported here) varying between a low of 0.18 (Industrial
Production) and a high of 0.52 ( N o n f a r mP a y r o l l ) . T h i ss u g g e s t st h a tt h em e a s u r e m e n te r r o ri s
related to macroeconomic uncertainty. In our theoretical model,σ
2
p arises from either uncertainty
about the macroeconomy or the quality of the public signal. In the ensuing empirical analysis,
we consider both possibilities.
4 Empirical Analysis
The model of Section 2 generates several implications that we now test in this section. In the
database described in Section 3, we are able to directly observe price changes,Pt −Pt−1,a sap r o x y
for p1, public news surprises Sjt ,a sap r o x yf o r Sp, and aggregate order ﬂow Ωt,a sap r o x yf o r
ω1. Yet, in our setting, it is only the unexpected portion of aggregate order ﬂow that aﬀects the
equilibrium prices of Eqs. (1) and (3). 13 Furthermore,ω1 i sa s s u m e dt od e p e n do n l yo ni n f o r m e d
and liquidity trading. Yet, in reality, many additional microstructure imperfections can cause
lagged e ﬀects in the observed order ﬂow (see Hasbrouck, 2004). Therefore, to implement our
model, we estimate Ω
∗
t , the unanticipated portion of aggregate order ﬂow.
12 Much of this evidence stems from the analysis of either GDP or the RTDS variables listed above. The evidence
is more controversial for money stock announcements.

ted portion of aggregate order ﬂow.
12 Much of this evidence stems from the analysis of either GDP or the RTDS variables listed above. The evidence
is more controversial for money stock announcements. For instance, Mankiw, Runkle, and Shapiro (1984) and
Mork (1990) ﬁnd that the preliminary growth rates of several Federal Reserve’s money aggregates are not e ﬃcient
predictors of the growth rates of ﬁnally-revised data. Yet, according to Kavajecz and Collins (1995), the bias
in preliminary monetary data may be attributed either to the speci ﬁc seasonal adjustment procedure used by
the Federal Reserve or to a di ﬀerent temporal aggregation than for ﬁnally-revised, not-seasonally adjusted data.
Monetary aggregates are not included in our database.
13 Indeed, the distributional assumptions in Section 2.1 imply that E (ω1)=0 in both Propositions 1 and 2.
14

For that purpose, we use the linear autoregressive model of Hasbrouck (1991),
xtin = ax + b(L)rtin + c(L)xtin + v(x)tin ,( 8 )
where xtin is the half-hour net order ﬂow in the market (purchases take a +1 and sales take a
−1)f o ri n t e r v a ltin, rtin is the half-hour quote revision, and b(L) and c(L) are polynomials in
the lag operator. W e estimate Eq. (8) separately for two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year Treasury
notes using 19 lags (one day) because they are su ﬃcient to eliminate all the serial correlation in
the data. The results that follow are robust to di ﬀerent lag-length polynomials.14 As previously
mentioned, we focus on daily horizons, for narrower intervals (e.g., as in Green, 2004) may lead to
underestimate the impact of information heterogeneity on investors’ trading activity. Therefore,
we compute aggregate unanticipated (or “abnormal”) net order ﬂow over each day t by simply
summing the 19 residuals of Eq. (8) within each day, Ω∗
t = P19
tin=1 v(x)t−1+ tin
19
,a sap r o x yf o rω1.
As shown in Table 1, this procedure successfully eliminates the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation in the
aggregate raw order ﬂow series Ωt.
GovPX calculates bond yields using transaction prices, so there is a mechanical inverse rela-
tion between the two quantities. To be consistent with the term-structure literature, we estimate
the impact of unanticipated order ﬂow and public information arrivals on daily yield changes
(rt =( yt − yt−1) × 100) rather than on price changes.

tent with the term-structure literature, we estimate
the impact of unanticipated order ﬂow and public information arrivals on daily yield changes
(rt =( yt − yt−1) × 100) rather than on price changes. Nonetheless, our results are robust to ei-
ther speciﬁcation. W e translate the equilibrium prices of Propositions 1 and 2 into the following
estimable equations:
rt = a + λΩ∗
t + εt (9)
when no public signal is released (Eq. (1)), and
rt = ap + λpΩ∗
t + λsj Sjt + εpt (10)
when a public signal Sjt becomes available to all market participants on day t (Eq. (3)). Ac-
cording to our model, we expect λ and λp to be negative, while, according to the Lucas (1982)
model, we expect λsj to be positive for positive real activity and in ﬂationary shocks.
Even in the absence of the information e ﬀects of our model, inventory considerations ( ﬁrst
formalized by Garman, 1976) may explain, either in full or in part, any signi ﬁcant correlation
between price changes and order ﬂow. Yield changes may in fact react to net order ﬂow imbal-
ances, to compensate market participants for providing liquidity, even when the orderﬂow has no
14 Our results are also robust to di ﬀerent speci ﬁcations of Eq. (8). For example, we sample bond yields each
time there is a transaction, rather than at thirty-minut e intervals. We also sample bond yields at an “optimal”
frequency determined according to the procedure of Ba ndi and Russell (2005). The evidence presented below is

tion, rather than at thirty-minut e intervals. We also sample bond yields at an “optimal”
frequency determined according to the procedure of Ba ndi and Russell (2005). The evidence presented below is
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to that obtained using these alternative sampling procedures, as well as
using the aggregate raw (rathe r than unanticipated) order ﬂow, Ωt. The robustness of our results re ﬂects the
fact that aggregate unanticipated order ﬂow, Ω∗
t , is very closely related to Ωt. Indeed, regardless of the selected
speciﬁcation, the resulting R2 from Eq. (8) are lower than 4%.
15

information content. To assess the relevance of this alternative hypothesis, we follow Hasbrouck
(1991) and include lagged values of unanticipated order ﬂow and yield changes in both Eqs. (9)
and (10). As in Hasbrouck (1991), we assume the permanent impact of trades is due to informa-
tion shocks and the transitory impact is due to noninformation (e.g., liquidity) shocks. Hence,
negative and signiﬁcant estimates for λ and λ
p are driven by transitory inventory control eﬀects
when accompanied by a positive and signi ﬁcant impact of lagged unanticipated net order ﬂow
on yield changes. In other words, signi ﬁcant contemporaneous order ﬂow e ﬀects are transient
if they are later reversed. On the other hand, negative and signi ﬁcant estimates for λ and λp
are driven by permanent information e ﬀects (consistent with our model) when accompanied by
negative and signi ﬁcant, or statistically insigni ﬁcant, impact of lagged unanticipated net order
ﬂow on yield changes.
4.1 Non-Announcement Days
W e start by estimating Eq. (9) across non-announcement days and then testing the main im-
plication of Proposition 1, namely that market liquidity ( λ−1) is decreasing in the heterogeneity
of speculators’ information endowments. First, we de ﬁne non-announcement days consistently
with our procedures to measure such heterogeneity (in Section 3.2.2). When P =1 ,w ed e -
ﬁne non-announcement days as all trading Fridays in the sample in which no Nonfarm Payroll

days consistently
with our procedures to measure such heterogeneity (in Section 3.2.2). When P =1 ,w ed e -
ﬁne non-announcement days as all trading Fridays in the sample in which no Nonfarm Payroll
Employment report is released, to control for potential day-of-the-week e ﬀects. When P =7
or 18,w ed e ﬁne non-announcement days as all trading days when none of the corresponding
announcements (either the inﬂuential ones or those underlined in Table 2) take place. W e then
test Corollary 1 by amending Eq. (9) as follows:
rt = a +
XN
i=0
λhiΩ∗
t−iDht +
XN
i=0
λliΩ∗
t−iDlt (11)
+
XN
i=0
λmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dht − Dlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where Dht (Dlt) is a dummy variable equal to one on non-announcement days with high (low)
heterogeneity of beliefs, as de ﬁned in Section 3.2.2, and equal to zero otherwise. Motivated by
the discussion above, we estimate both the contemporaneous and lagged eﬀects of unanticipated
order ﬂow on yield changes. Speci ﬁcally, we deﬁne the impact of order ﬂow on yield changes as
permanent (i.e., driven by information eﬀects) when lasting for at least ﬁve trading days. Hence,
we set N =5 in Eq. (11). 15 W e report the resulting estimates in Table 4 using the three proxies
for information heterogeneity, P =1 , P =7 ,a n d P =1 8. Since higher dispersion days are also
associated with more volatile bond yields, the standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.

ies
for information heterogeneity, P =1 , P =7 ,a n d P =1 8. Since higher dispersion days are also
associated with more volatile bond yields, the standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.
W e also correct for serial correlation, given the mild, though statistically signi ﬁcant, ﬁrst-order
autocorrelation in daily bond yield changes.
15 Nonetheless, the inference that follows is robust to smaller or bigger values for N .
16

The results in Table 4 provide strong evidence for information e ﬀects of order ﬂow on bond
yield changes and no evidence for inventory control eﬀects. For all maturities and nearly all mea-
sures of dispersion of beliefs, the estimated contemporaneous correlation between unanticipated
order ﬂow and yield changes (λ0)i sn e g a t i v ea n ds i g n iﬁcant. The coeﬃcients for one-period lagged
unanticipated order ﬂow (λ1), not reported here, are instead often negative, always statistically
insigniﬁcant at the 5% level, and about ten times smaller in magnitude than the contemporane-
ous coeﬃcients λ0. Lastly, the resulting cumulated impact of unanticipated order ﬂow on yield
changes (P5
i=0 λi in T able 4) is mostly statistically signi ﬁcant, albeit more weakly so on non-
announcement days with low heterogeneity of beliefs. In other words, we ﬁnd no evidence that
the impact of unanticipated U.S. Treasury bond order ﬂow on yield changes is reversed in the
next ﬁve trading days, except in correspondence with low dispersion of beliefs about Nonfarm
Payroll announcements (P =1 ).
T h er e s u l t si nT a b l e4a l s op r o v i d es t r o n ge v i d e n c ei nf a v o ro fC o r o l l a r y1 ,e s p e c i a l l yf o r
the ﬁve-year bond, the most liquid U.S. Treasury note. Regardless of whether we use only
the Nonfarm Payroll announcement to measure dispersion of beliefs or whether we aggregate

p e c i a l l yf o r
the ﬁve-year bond, the most liquid U.S. Treasury note. Regardless of whether we use only
the Nonfarm Payroll announcement to measure dispersion of beliefs or whether we aggregate
dispersion of beliefs across macroeconomic announcements, we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that λ
h0 −λl0 < 0. This evidence is consistent with the basic intuition of the benchmark model of
Section 2.1: In the absence of a public signal, greater information heterogeneity among investors
translates into greater adverse selection risk for the market-makers, hence into lower market
liquidity (|λh0| > |λl0|).
The increase in adverse selection costs in correspondence with high dispersion of beliefs among
market participants is not only statistically but also economically signiﬁcant. For example, when
classifying trading days according to SSD1t (i.e., only with respect to the volatility of Nonfarm
Payroll forecasts), we ﬁnd that a one standard deviation shock to unanticipated order ﬂow in
ﬁve-year bonds decreases their yields by10.03 b a s i sp o i n t so nh i g hd i s p e r s i o nd a y s(Dht =1 )a n d
just 4.06 basis points on low dispersion days ( Dlt =1 ), as compared to a daily yield change one
standard deviation from its mean of roughly 6.4 b a s i sp o i n t s( i nT a b l e1 )o v e rt h ee n t i r es a m p l e .
Consistently, the correlation between dailyﬁve-year bond yield changes and unanticipated daily

n from its mean of roughly 6.4 b a s i sp o i n t s( i nT a b l e1 )o v e rt h ee n t i r es a m p l e .
Consistently, the correlation between dailyﬁve-year bond yield changes and unanticipated daily
net order ﬂow (the adjusted R2 of the above regression) is much greater during high dispersion
days (R2
ha =4 1.38%) than during low dispersion days ( R2
la =9 .65%).
We a l s oﬁnd evidence in favor of Corollary 1 in the two-year bond market, although only when
we use the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts about Nonfarm Payroll Employment ( P =1 )a n d
Inﬂuential announcements (P =7 )a sp r o x i e sf o ri n f o r m a t i o nh e t er o g e n e i t y ,a n di nt h et e n - y e a r
bond market when we use the Nonfarm Payroll announcement alone. This may be due to the
fact that not all macroeconomic announcements are equally important ex ante, thus making the
aggregate dispersion of beliefs across announcements a noisy measure of such heterogeneity. W e
explore this issue in greater depth in Section 4.2.
17

4.1.1 Omitted V ariable Biases
In the model of Section 2, equilibrium market liquidity ( λ−1 and λ−1
p ) is a function of several
parameters beyond the one determining the intensity of information heterogeneity among spec-
ulators (χ). For example, in the benchmark equilibrium with no public signal (Proposition 1),
λ also depends on the intensity of noise trading ( σ
2
u), the number of informed traders ( M), and
the volatility of the intrinsic value of the asset ( σ2
v). The regression model of Eq. (11), whose
estimates are reported in Table 4, does not explicitly control for any of these parameters. These
o m i s s i o n sh a v et h ep o t e n t i a lt ob i a so u ri n f e r e n c e .
To begin with, in our model the parameters σ2
u, σ2
v,a n d M are unrelated to the dispersion of
beliefs. If this were true, the estimation of Eq. (11) would in principle be unbiased. Nevertheless,
omitted variable biases may arise from relaxing some of the model’s most stringent assumptions.
For example, if we allowed for endogenous entry of informed traders, the equilibrium number of
market participants might be correlated with their dispersion of beliefs, since the latter would
aﬀect investors’ potential proﬁts from trading. In addition, misspeci ﬁcation biases may arise
from the intertemporal dynamics of either speculators’ participation, intensity of noise trading,
or fundamental uncertainty. It is di ﬃcult to control for these variables. In this section, we do

ise
from the intertemporal dynamics of either speculators’ participation, intensity of noise trading,
or fundamental uncertainty. It is di ﬃcult to control for these variables. In this section, we do
our best to gauge the robustness of the results presented above to their inclusion. The analysis
that follows indicates that these results are indeed robust.
Speciﬁcally, we conduct several robustness checks. First, the inclusion of lagged unantici-
pated order ﬂow in Eq. (11) allows us to assess the relevance of any transient, noninformation
eﬀect (hence not just inventory control e ﬀects but also those due to noise trading, σ
2
u)o nt h e
relationship between trades and price changes (see Hasbrouck, 1991). As previously mentioned,
the estimation of Eq. (11) in Table 4 indicates that the impact of unanticipated government
bond order ﬂow on yield changes is permanent, i.e., cannot be explained by transitory noise
eﬀects. Alternatively, we determine the importance of noise trading by computing order ﬂow
and yield changes over disjoint intervals of each day in our sample, as in Brandt and Kavajecz
(2004), rather than concurrently. In particular, we aggregate unanticipated order ﬂow in the
morning (from 7:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.), labeled as time t, and average yields from 12:00 p.m.
until the end of each trading day (5:00 p.m.), labeled as time t +1 . W e then regress bond yield
changes at time t +1 on unanticipated order ﬂow at time t. This procedure not only prevents

2:00 p.m.
until the end of each trading day (5:00 p.m.), labeled as time t +1 . W e then regress bond yield
changes at time t +1 on unanticipated order ﬂow at time t. This procedure not only prevents
non-synchronous measurement errors (as argued by Brandt and Kavajecz, 2004) but also allows
us to identify the long run or permanent e ﬀect of order ﬂow on prices. The resulting estimates
of market liquidity, not reported here, are qualitatively similar to those from Eq. (11) presented
in T able 4.
W e also control for the number of informed traders ( M) and the volatility of the intrinsic
value of the asset ( σ
2
v). W e do so by including in Eq. (11) additional variables capturing the
interaction between (i.e., the product of): (i) order ﬂow and daily realized volatility,16 (ii) order
16 We estimate realized volatility applying the procedure of Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003) to
18

ﬂow and the number of transactions, and (iii) order ﬂow and a weight linearly increasing as
the announcement date approaches. 17 In our model, the degree of information heterogeneity
aﬀects both equilibrium price volatility and the aggressiveness of informed trading (proxied by
the number of transactions, as in Section 3.2.2). Depending on the strength of these e ﬀects, the
inclusion of those cross terms in Eq. (11) may reduce the statistical signi ﬁcance of the relation
between market liquidity and dispersion of beliefs. Instead, we ﬁnd no evidence that order ﬂow
interacts with either the number of transactions or the proximity to the announcement date. The
product of order ﬂow and daily realized volatility is statistically signi ﬁcant only in the ﬁve-year
Treasury bond market.18 This is not surprising, since we expect informed investors to be more
active in the most liquid trading venues (e.g., Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991), as so the ﬁve-year
bond market is generally deemed (e.g., Fleming, 2003). It is therefore possible that our proxy
for realized volatility is successfully capturing the time-varying participation of informed traders
only in the market where such participation is probably most important. Nonetheless, neither
the economic nor the statistical signi ﬁcance of the dispersion of beliefs dummies in Table 4 are
aﬀected by the inclusion of these interaction terms in Eq. (11).

most important. Nonetheless, neither
the economic nor the statistical signi ﬁcance of the dispersion of beliefs dummies in Table 4 are
aﬀected by the inclusion of these interaction terms in Eq. (11).
Lastly, we control for variables outside our model that might spuriously a ﬀect our results.
For example, Treasury auction dates might have a liquidity eﬀect on the secondary bond market.
Thus, if our proxies for dispersion of beliefs were spuriously correlated with auction dates, an
additional omitted variable bias might arise. W e account for this eventuality by including the
interaction between order ﬂow and dummies for these dates in Eq. (11).
19 The liquidity of U.S.
Treasury bonds may also be a ﬀected by their repurchase agreement (repo) rates, i.e., by their
specialness. According to Moulton (2004), the relative repo specialness of on-the-run Treasury
securities (such as those in our database) generallyincreases in proximity of auction dates. Hence,
the inclusion of auction dummies in Eq. (11) may control for spurious liquidity shocks induced
by time-varying specialness as well. Similarly, we include day-of-the-week and annual e ﬀects to
control for weekly seasonality and temporal trends in the order ﬂow and/or the dispersion of
beliefs. None of these e ﬀects are statistically signiﬁcant.
yield mid-quotes sampled at an “optimal” frequenc y determined according to Bandi and Russel (2005).

he order ﬂow and/or the dispersion of
beliefs. None of these e ﬀects are statistically signiﬁcant.
yield mid-quotes sampled at an “optimal” frequenc y determined according to Bandi and Russel (2005).
17 Presumably, the number of informed traders might increase as the public announcement date approaches.
We do not include this product term when measuring dispersion of beliefs only with forecasts of Nonfarm Payroll
announcements (i.e., SSD
1t), since then we only use the Fridays before the announcement dates to control for
potential day-of-the-week e ﬀects.
18 The resulting adjusted R2 from the introduction of this cross term in Eq. (8) for ﬁve-year bond yield
diﬀerentials increases from 23.30%, 20.31%,a n d 19.40% (i.e., R2
a of Table 4) to 30.05%, 23.18%,a n d 23.22%
when measuring the dispersion of beliefs with the standard deviation of professional forecasts of Nonfarm Payroll
(P =1 ), “inﬂuential” (P =7 ), and all available macroeconomic news announcements ( P =1 8), respectively.
19 The history of auction dates we use in the analys is is available on the U.S. Treasury website, at
http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/of/ofaicqry.htm.
19

4.2 Announcement Days
When we introduce a public signal in the model (Proposition 2), market liquidity increases
(Corollary 2), because the presence of a trade-free source of information and more aggressive
trading by the speculators mitigates the adverse selection risk for the market-makers. In our
empirical analysis, this translates into observing a negative diﬀerence (since we work with yields)
between λ (of Eq. (1)) and λ
p (of Eq. (3)) in the following regression:
rt = a +
XN
i=0
λiΩ∗
t−i(1 − DPt )+
XN
i=0
λpiΩ∗
t−iDPt +
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,( 1 2 )
where DPt is a dummy variable equal to one if either the Nonfarm Payroll Employment report
(P =1 ), any of the 7 inﬂuential announcements listed in Section 3.2.2 ( P =7 ), or any of
the 18 announcements underlined in T able 2 ( P =1 8 ) is released on day t and equal to zero
otherwise. As in Eq. (11), we set N =5 to assess the relevance of permanent (i.e., information)
versus temporary (i.e., inventory control) e ﬀects of unanticipated order ﬂow on yield changes.
W e estimate Eq. (12) for each announcement typeP =1 , 7,o r 18 and either two-year, ﬁve-year,
or ten-year bond yield changes, and report the resulting estimates in Table 5.
Consistent with Table 4, the evidence in Table 5 indicates that, even during announcement
days, both the contemporaneous and cumulative impact of unanticipated order ﬂow on yield
changes (λp0 and P5
i=0 λpi, respectively) are negative and statistically signi ﬁcant (often at the
1% level).

days, both the contemporaneous and cumulative impact of unanticipated order ﬂow on yield
changes (λp0 and P5
i=0 λpi, respectively) are negative and statistically signi ﬁcant (often at the
1% level). Hence, the correlation between unanticipated order ﬂow and yield changes during
announcement days does not appear to be driven by inventory control eﬀects. Table 5 also shows
that, in most cases, the di ﬀerence between λ0 and λp0 is not statistically signi ﬁcant (except for
the ﬁve-year Treasury notes when P =1 or 7). Our model suggests that this would be the case
if the public news surprises in our sample ( Sp in Eq. (3)) were noisy, since limσp→∞ λp = λ.Y e t ,
our model (Corollary 3) also implies that noisy public signals should have little or no impact
on price changes (i.e., lim
σp→∞ λs =0 as well). This interpretation, although intriguing, is not
exhaustive since in unreported analysis we ﬁnd that seven of the macroeconomic news releases in
our sample (the “inﬂuential” ones) do have a statistically signiﬁcant impact on day-to-day bond
yield changes between 1992 and 2000 (i.e., at least some λs are statistically signiﬁcant).
An alternative interpretation of the statistically indistinguishable estimates for λ and λp in
Table 5 is that the release of public macroeconomic signals may increase investors’ information
heterogeneity (as argued in Kim and Verrecchia, 1994, 1997), hence compensating the reduction

and λp in
Table 5 is that the release of public macroeconomic signals may increase investors’ information
heterogeneity (as argued in Kim and Verrecchia, 1994, 1997), hence compensating the reduction
in adverse selection costs due to the availability of trade-free sources of information (as in our
model). This interpretation is consistent with the evidence reported by Green (2004), who ﬁnds
that the estimated half-hour price impact of order ﬂow in the Treasury bond market is actually
higher during the thirty-minute interval immediately after an announcement than during the
thirty-minute interval immediately before the announcement or on non-announcement days.
However, the analysis of both the estimated correlation between bond yield changes and
unanticipated net order ﬂow and the average cumulative impact of the latter on the former
20

provides stronger support for Corollary 2. Indeed, the adjusted R2 of Eq. (12) is always higher
for non-announcement days than for announcement days (i.e., R2
f >R 2
fp in Table 5), with the
sole exception of ﬁve-year notes when P =7 . Furthermore, the impact of unanticipated order
ﬂow in either the two-year or the ten-year Treasury notes on the corresponding yield changes
is permanent during non-announcement days (statistically signi ﬁcant P5
i=0 λi in Table 5), but
only transitory during Nonfarm Payroll announcement days (statistically insigni ﬁcant P5
i=0 λpi
in Table 5). This suggests that dealers rely more heavily on unanticipated order ﬂow to set bond
prices during non-announcement days than on announcement days, consistent with our model
and the ﬁndings in Brandt and Kavajecz (2004).
O v e r a l l ,t h ee v i d e n c er e p o r t e di nT a b l e5i n d i c a t e s( a l b e i tn o ta ss t r o n g l ya si nS e c t i o n4 . 1 )
that the release of public signals does not increase (and occasionally reduces) adverse selection
costs and does not impair (and occasionally improves) market liquidity. Nonetheless, both the
above discussion and the comparative statics of Figure 1B also indicate that any such liquidity
gain may crucially depend on the quality of the public signal (σ
2
p)a n do nt h ed e g r e eo fi n f o r m a t i o n
heterogeneity among market participants ( γ). W e explore these issues next, starting with the
latter.

pend on the quality of the public signal (σ
2
p)a n do nt h ed e g r e eo fi n f o r m a t i o n
heterogeneity among market participants ( γ). W e explore these issues next, starting with the
latter.
4.2.1 Heterogeneous Information on Announcement Days
In this section, we analyze the e ﬀect of information heterogeneity on market liquidity during
announcement days. For that purpose, we estimate the following representation of Eq. (10):
rt = a +
XP
j=1
λsj Sjt +
XN
i=0
λphiΩ∗
t−iDht +
XN
i=0
λpliΩ∗
t−iDlt (13)
+
XN
i=0
λpmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dht − Dlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where Dht (Dlt) is the high (low) dispersion of beliefs dummy de ﬁned in Section 4.1, to account
f o rm u l t i p l es i g n a l sa r r i v i n go nt h es a m ed a y ,a n dN =5 . W e report the resulting estimates in
Table 6, and assess their signi ﬁcance after correcting the standard errors for heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation.
According to our model (Remark 2), greater dispersion of beliefs among speculators reduces
market liquidity during announcement days (i.e., λph0 − λpl0 < 0 in Eq. (13)) only when the
public signal is noisy, since the latter induces those heterogeneously informed speculators to use
cautiously their private signals, thus increasing adverse selection risks for the market-makers.
Vice versa, if the quality of the public signal is high ( σ
2
p is low), more heterogeneously informed
speculators display their caution by relying less on their private signals (and more on the public

ce versa, if the quality of the public signal is high ( σ
2
p is low), more heterogeneously informed
speculators display their caution by relying less on their private signals (and more on the public
signal) in their trading activity, thus lowering the perceived adverse selections risk for the market-
makers and improving market liquidity (i.e., λ
ph0 − λpl0 > 0 in Eq. (13)).
Table 6 reveals that the di ﬀerence between λph0 and λpl0 is always negative and, in most
cases, both economically and statistically signiﬁcant. For instance, when we measure dispersion of
21

beliefs using the Nonfarm Payroll announcement, a one standard deviation shock to unanticipated
order ﬂow decreases ten-year bond yields by 9.62 basis points during high dispersion days, while
it increases bond yields by 3.06 basis points during low dispersion days. This evidence suggests
that the dispersion of beliefs among market participants has an important impact on Treasury
bond market liquidity, in the direction predicted by our model, even in the presence of public
signals of macroeconomic fundamentals. This evidence is also (indirectly) consistent with the
conjecture made in Section 4.2 that public signal noise is “su ﬃciently” high in our sample. In
Section 4.2.3 below, we gauge more explicitly the potential role of public signal noise on market
liquidity.
W e now turn to the impact of public signals on yield changes. According to the extended
model of Section 2.2, a public signal can induce price (and yield) changes through two channels
that, in the spirit of Evans and Lyons (2003), we call direct (through market-makers’ belief
updating process) and indirect (through speculators’ trades in the orderﬂow). Yet, in the model,
the direct channel is always more important than the indirect one. The evidence presented in
Tabl e 6 conﬁrms this latter result: The adjusted R
2 of the fully speci ﬁed regressions of Eq. (13),
i.e., including both the unanticipated order ﬂow and the public signal(s), R2
a,i sb e t w e e n2 and

e 6 conﬁrms this latter result: The adjusted R
2 of the fully speci ﬁed regressions of Eq. (13),
i.e., including both the unanticipated order ﬂow and the public signal(s), R2
a,i sb e t w e e n2 and
84 times bigger than the adjusted R2 of the regressions estimated using only unanticipated order
ﬂow, R2
fa .
4.2.2 Public Signal Noise
Many of the results in Section 4.2.1 above are generally weaker in correspondence with the
aggregate proxies for information heterogeneity described in Eq. (7). In particular, the relevance
of public signals for bond yield changes (i.e., the di ﬀerence between R2
a and R2
fa in Table 6)
is declining in P , the number of announcements used in the analysis. This may be explained
by a potentially mistaken classi ﬁcation of certain macroeconomic releases as important public
announcements. Indeed, both Eq. (7) and the corresponding classi ﬁcation of announcement
days implicitly assume that all U.S. macroeconomic news releases listed in Table 2 are equally
important. However, the literature (e.g., Fleming and Remolona, 1997) suggests that not all
public information may be equally relevant ex ante to participants in the U.S. Treasury bond
markets.
This can be due to several factors: The dispersion of beliefs might be higher for certain
announcements than for others, some announcements may not reveal any useful information to
p r i c eb o n d s( i . e . ,t h ed a y si nw h i c ht h e yo c c u ra r eeﬀectively non-announcement days), or some

ments than for others, some announcements may not reveal any useful information to
p r i c eb o n d s( i . e . ,t h ed a y si nw h i c ht h e yo c c u ra r eeﬀectively non-announcement days), or some
announcements might be noisier than others. According to our model, the availability of a public
signal of higher (lower) quality implies a higher (lower) impact of order ﬂow on equilibrium price
changes during announcement days. In this section, we examine the e ﬀect of public signal noise
directly.
Speciﬁcally, Remark 1 and Corollary 3 state that adverse selection costs are higher and the
22

price reaction to public announcement surprises is lower when the public signal noise is high.
Intuitively, when the public signal is noisy, the market-makers rely more heavily on the order
ﬂow than on the public signal, thus requiring greater compensation for providing liquidity. The
evidence in Table 7 supports this claim. There we report estimates of the following equation:
rt = a + λsnhSptDnht + λsnlSptDnlt + λsnmSpt(1 − Dnht − Dnlt)+
XN
i=0
λpnhiΩ∗
t−iDnht +
XN
i=0
λpnliΩ∗
t−iDnlt + (14)
XN
i=0
λpnmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dnht − Dnlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where Dnht (Dnlt)i sad u m m yv a r i a b l ee q u a lt oo n eo na n n o u n c e m e n td a y sw i t hh i g h( l o w )
public signal noise, de ﬁned in Section 3.2.3 as the absolute value of the di ﬀerence between the
actual announcement minus the last revision of the announcement being on the top (bottom)
70th (30th) percentile of their empirical distribution, and equal to zero otherwise, and N =5 .
W e limit our analysis to Nonfarm Payroll, Industrial Production, and Capacity Utilization news
releases, since those are the only announcements in our MMS database for which RTDS revision
data is available.
Table 7 shows that the impact of these public signals on bond yield changes is generally more
signiﬁcant when their noise is lower (columns λ
snm and λsnl). Accordingly, we also ﬁnd that (i)
the coe ﬃcients measuring the contemporaneous and permanent impact of unanticipated order

nerally more
signiﬁcant when their noise is lower (columns λ
snm and λsnl). Accordingly, we also ﬁnd that (i)
the coe ﬃcients measuring the contemporaneous and permanent impact of unanticipated order
ﬂow on bond yield changes are generally insigni ﬁcant on announcement days when the public
signal noise is low (columns λpnl0 and P5
i=0 λpnli in Table 7), and (ii) the adjusted R2 of order
ﬂow alone is generally higher on days with high public signal noise ( Dnht =1 )t h a no nd a y s
with low public signal noise ( Dnlt =1 ), i.e., R2
fn h a >R 2
fn l a; yet, these di ﬀerences are not large.
These results suggest that the impact of the release of macroeconomic data on the process of
price formation in the U.S. Treasury market is decreasing in the quality of the public signals, as
argued in the model of Section 2.2, albeit not importantly so.
Finally, we amend all the regression models speci ﬁed above to account for the potential
omitted variable biases described in Section 4.1.1. Many of these biases are in fact more likely
to arise when analyzing the impact of both information heterogeneity and public signal noise
on market liquidity during announcement days. For example, the number of informed market
participants is likely to be endogenously higher during announcement days regardless of their
dispersion of beliefs, if they expect the Treasury bond market to be more liquid then (e.g.,
Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991). In addition, as observed in Section 3.2.3, public signal noise may

ess of their
dispersion of beliefs, if they expect the Treasury bond market to be more liquid then (e.g.,
Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991). In addition, as observed in Section 3.2.3, public signal noise may
stem not only from the signal’s intrinsic quality but also from fundamental uncertainty (σ
2
v in our
model), which aﬀects market liquidity directly as well (Proposition 2). Yet, we ﬁnd that all our
conclusions are robust to the inclusion of the sam e control variables employed for our analysis of
non-announcement days.
23

5 Conclusions and F uture Research
The main goal of this paper is to deepen our understanding of the links between daily bond yield
movements, news about fundamentals, and order ﬂow conditional on the investors’ dispersion
of beliefs and the public signals’ noise. To that end, we theoretically identify and empirically
document important news and order ﬂow e ﬀects in the U.S. Treasury bond market. To guide
our analysis, we develop a parsimonious model of speculative trading in the presence of asym-
metric sharing of information among imperfectly competitive traders and a public signal of the
terminal value of the traded asset. W e then test its equilibrium implications by studying the
relation between daily two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year U.S. Treasury bond yield changes and
unanticipated order ﬂow and real-time U.S. macroeconomic news releases.
Our evidence suggests that announcement and order ﬂow surprises produce conditional, per-
sistent mean jumps, i.e., that the process of price formation in the bond market is linked to
information about fundamentals and agents’ beliefs. The nature of this linkage is sensitive to
the intensity of investors’ dispersion of beliefs and the noise of the public announcement (albeit
more weakly so). In particular, and consistent with our model, unanticipated order ﬂow is more
highly correlated with bond yield changes when the dispersion of beliefs across informed traders
is high and the public announcement is noisy.

nsistent with our model, unanticipated order ﬂow is more
highly correlated with bond yield changes when the dispersion of beliefs across informed traders
is high and the public announcement is noisy.
These ﬁndings allow us to draw several implications for future research. Existing term struc-
ture models are notorious for their poor out-of-sample forecast performance (e.g., Du ﬀee, 2002).
Recently, Diebold and Li (2003) use a variation of the Nelson and Siegel (1987) exponential
components framework to forecast yield curve movements at short and long horizons, ﬁnding
encouraging results at short horizons. W e show here that U.S. Treasury bond order ﬂow is
contemporaneously correlated with daily yield changes and that the signi ﬁcance of this relation
depends on the degree of information heterogenei ty about macroeconomic fundamentals among
market participants. In future work, we intend to include order ﬂow information to forecast the
term structure.
Our results also indicate that day-to-day bond yield changes and order ﬂow are most sensi-
tive to Nonfarm Payroll Employment announcements. Nominal bond yields depend on future
inﬂation and future capital productivity, hence naturally react to employment announcement
surprises. Previous studies observe that Nonfarm Payroll Employment is the ﬁrst news release
for a given month (e.g., Fleming and Remolona, 1997; Andersen et al., 2003). However, our

ent announcement
surprises. Previous studies observe that Nonfarm Payroll Employment is the ﬁrst news release
for a given month (e.g., Fleming and Remolona, 1997; Andersen et al., 2003). However, our
analysis implicitly accounts for the timing of the announcements, by focusing exclusively on
their surprise content. Hence, the importance of this announcement should depend on its pre-
dictive power. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, no study has shown that the Nonfarm Payroll
Employment is the best predictor for future activity and in ﬂation out of the 25 macroeconomic
announcements in our sample.
20 Thus, we suspect that its importance goes beyond its predictive
20 The NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee mentions that no single macroeconomic variable is the most
important predictor of recessions and expansions (e.g., see http://www.nber.org/cycles/recessions.html). The
24

power for real activity. Morris and Shin (2002) provide an interesting theoretical explanation for
this overreactionto Nonfarm Payroll news. They argue that bond yields will be most reactive to
the types of news emphasized by the press. In their model, this overreaction to news is rational
and reﬂects the coordination role of public information. W e look forward to future research that
further investigates this possibility.
6 Appendix
P r o o fo fP r o p o s i t i o n1 .As noted in Section 2.1.1, the proof is by construction. W e
start by guessing that equilibrium p1 and xk are given by p1 = A0 + A1ω1 and xk = B0 + B1Svk ,
respectively, where A1 > 0. Those expressions and the de ﬁnition of ω1 imply that, for the kth
speculator,
E (p1|Svk )= A0 + A1xk + A1B0 (M − 1) + A1B1 (M − 1) γSvk .( A - 1 )
Using Eq. (A-1), the ﬁrst order condition of the maximization of the kth speculator’s expected
proﬁt E(πk|Svk ) is given by
ψSvk − A0 − (M +1 ) A1B0 − 2A1B1Svk − (M − 1) A1B1γSvk =0 ,( A - 2 )
where ψ = σ2
v
Mσ2s
. The second order condition is satis ﬁed, since 2A1 > 0.F o r E q .( A - 2 ) t o b e
true, it must be that
A0 =( M +1 ) A1B0 (A-3)
2A1B1 = ψ − (M − 1) A1B1γ.( A - 4 )
The distributional assumptions of Section 2.1 imply that the orderﬂow ω1 is normally distributed
with mean E (ω1)= MB0 and variance var (ω1)= σ2
u +B2
1 σ2
v
.S i n c ecov (v, ω1)= B1σ2
v, it ensues
that
E (v|ω1)= B1σ2
v
σ2u + B2
1 σ2v
(ω1 − MB0) .( A - 5 )

he orderﬂow ω1 is normally distributed
with mean E (ω1)= MB0 and variance var (ω1)= σ2
u +B2
1 σ2
v
.S i n c ecov (v, ω1)= B1σ2
v, it ensues
that
E (v|ω1)= B1σ2
v
σ2u + B2
1 σ2v
(ω1 − MB0) .( A - 5 )
According to the de ﬁnition of a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium in this economy (Section 2.1.1),
p1 = E (v|ω1). Therefore, our conjecture for p1 implies that
A0 = −A1MB0 (A-6)
A1 = B1σ2
v
σ2u + B2
1 σ2v
.( A - 7 )
committee takes into account real GDP, real income, empl oyment, industrial production, and wholesale and retail
sales to determine whether the U.S. is in a recession or in an expansion. When running a horse race between
macroeconomic variables and ﬁnancial variables to predict the busines s cycle, Estrella and Mishkin (1998) do not
even consider Nonfarm Payroll announcements.
25

The expressions for A0, A1, B0,a n d B1 in Proposition 1 must solve the system made of Eqs.
(A-3), (A-4), (A-6), and (A-7) to represent a linear equilibrium. De ﬁning A1B0 from Eq. (A-3)
and plugging it into Eq. (A-6) leads us to A0 =0 . Thus, it must be that B0 =0 to satisfy Eq.
(A-3). W e are left with the task of ﬁnding A1 and B1.S o l v i n g E q .( A - 4 ) f o rA1,w eo b t a i n
A1 = ψ
B1 [2 + (M − 1) γ].( A - 8 )
W e then equate Eq. (A-8) to Eq. (A-7) to get A2
1 = σ2v ψ[2+(M−1)γ−ψ]
σ2u[2+(M−1)γ]2 . This expression implies that
A1 = σv ψ
1
2
σu[2+(M−1)γ] ,w h e r eψ
1
2 = σv
σs
√
M is the unique square root of ψ,s i n c e2+( M − 1) γ − ψ =1
and ψ > 0. Substituting the solution for A1 into Eq. (A-8) leads to B1 = σuψ
1
2
σv
.B o t hλ and Eq.
(2) then ensue from the de ﬁnitions of δk = ψSvk and ψ. Finally, we observe that Proposition 1 is
equivalent to a symmetric Cournot equilibrium with M speculators. Therefore, the “backward
reaction mapping” introduced by Novshek (1984) to ﬁnd n-ﬁrm Cournot equilibria proves that,
given any linear pricing rule, the symmetric linear strategies xk of Eq. (2) indeed represent the
unique Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the Bayesian game among speculators.
Proof of Corollary 1. Market liquidity is increasing in the number of speculators since,
in correspondence with the same γ,t h e ﬁnite di ﬀerence ∆λ = λ (at M +1 ) − λ (at M)=
σ2
v
√M+1[σ2
v +(M+1)Mχ]
1
2
σu[σ2v (M+2)+(M+1)Mχ] −
σ2
v
√
M[σ2
v
+M(M−1)χ]
1
2

he number of speculators since,
in correspondence with the same γ,t h e ﬁnite di ﬀerence ∆λ = λ (at M +1 ) − λ (at M)=
σ2
v
√M+1[σ2
v +(M+1)Mχ]
1
2
σu[σ2v (M+2)+(M+1)Mχ] −
σ2
v
√
M[σ2
v
+M(M−1)χ]
1
2
σu[σ2v (M+1)+M(M−1)χ] =0 only when speculators’ information is heteroge-
neous (χ (at M +1 )= σ2
v
M+1 and χ (at M)= σ2
v
M such that γ =0 ) and always negative otherwise.
Moreover, limM→∞ λ =0 . Market liquidity is decreasing in the heterogeneity of speculators’ Svk
since λ =
σ2
v
√
M[σ2
v
+M(M−1)χ]
1
2
σu[σ2v (M+1)+M(M−1)χ] is a concave function of χ with its maximum at χ = σ2
v
M , i.e., when
σss =0 . Indeed, ∂λ
∂χ = −
M
3
2 (M−1)2σ2
v (Mχ−σ2
v )
2σu[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]
1
2 [σ2v (M+1)+M(M−1)χ]2 ,i m p l y i n gt h a t∂λ
∂χ > 0 for χ < σ2
v
M
(i.e., when γ > 0), ∂λ
∂χ < 0 for χ > σ2
v
M (i.e., when γ < 0), and ﬁnally ∂λ
∂χ =0 for χ = σ2
v
M (i.e., when
γ =0 ).
Proof of Proposition 2. This proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 1 above, hence
we only sketch its outline. Here we start by guessing that equilibrium p1 and xk are given by p1 =
A0 + A1ω1 + A2Sp and xk = B0 + B1Svk + B2Sp, respectively, where A1 > 0. Since the de ﬁnition
of δ∗
k implies that E(v|Svk ,S p)= αSvk +
³
β + σ2
v
σ2p
´
Sp and E(Svj |Svk ,S p)= γpSvk +
¡
γp − 1
¢ β
α Sp,
those expressions lead to the following ﬁrst order condition of the maximization of E(πk|Svk ,S p):
αSvk +
µ
β + σ2
v
σ2p
¶
Sp − (M − 1) A1B1γpSvk − 2A1B1Svk − (M +1 ) A1B0 (A-9)
−A0 − (M +1 ) A1B2Sp − (M − 1) A1B1
¡
γp − 1
¢ β

e following ﬁrst order condition of the maximization of E(πk|Svk ,S p):
αSvk +
µ
β + σ2
v
σ2p
¶
Sp − (M − 1) A1B1γpSvk − 2A1B1Svk − (M +1 ) A1B0 (A-9)
−A0 − (M +1 ) A1B2Sp − (M − 1) A1B1
¡
γp − 1
¢ β
αSp − A2Sp =0 .
26

F o rE q . ( A - 9 )t ob et r u e ,i tm u s tb et h a t
−A0 =( M +1 ) A1B0 (A-10)
2A1B1 = α − (M − 1) A1B1γp (A-11)
A2 = − (M +1 ) A1B2 + β + σ2
v
σ2p
− (M − 1) A1B1
¡
γp − 1
¢ β
α (A-12)
The distributional assumptions of Section 2.1 imply that
E (v|ω1,S p)= B1σ2
v
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢
σ2uσ2
p
+ B2
1 σ2v
¡
σ2p − σ2v
¢ (ω1 − MB0) (A-13)
+σ2
v
£
σ2
u − MB1B2
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢¤
σ2uσ2
p
+ B2
1 σ2v
¡
σ2p − σ2v
¢ Sp.
Since p1 = E (v|ω1) in equilibrium, our conjecture for p1 implies that
A0 = −A1MB0 (A-14)
A1 = B1σ2
v
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢
σ2uσ2
p
+ B2
1 σ2v
¡
σ2p − σ2v
¢ (A-15)
A2 = σ2
v
£
σ2
u − MB1B2
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢¤
σ2uσ2
p
+ B2
1 σ2v
¡
σ2p − σ2v
¢ .( A - 1 6 )
The expressions for A0, A1, A2, B0, B1,a n d B2 in Proposition 2 must solve the system made
of Eqs. (A-10), (A-11), (A-12), (A-14), (A-15), and (A-16) to represent a linear equilibrium.
First, we solve Eq. (A-11) for A
1 and equate the ensuing expression to Eq. (A-15) to get
A2
1 =
ασ2
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2uσ2
p
[2+(M−1)γp]
2 ,s i n c e2+( M − 1) γp − α =1 . T h i si m p l i e st h a tA1 =
α
1
2 σv (σ2
p−σ2
v )
1
2
σuσp[2+(M−1)γp] >
0,w h e r e α
1
2 and
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 are the unique square roots of α and
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢
, respectively,
since α > 0 and σ2
p > σ2
v. Substituting this expression into Eq. (A-11) implies that B1 =
ασuσp
£
ασ2
v
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢¤− 1
2 . Substituting the solution for B1 into Eq. (A-16), plugging both the
resulting expression for A2 and the solution for A1 into Eq. (A-12), and solving for B2 leads to

σp
£
ασ2
v
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢¤− 1
2 . Substituting the solution for B1 into Eq. (A-16), plugging both the
resulting expression for A2 and the solution for A1 into Eq. (A-12), and solving for B2 leads to
B2 = B1
β
α .R e p l a c i n gB1 and B2 in Eq. (A-16) with their solutions above and α and β with their
deﬁnitions in Section 2.2 gives A2 = σ2
v
σ2p
.F i n a l l y , d eﬁning A1B0 from Eq. (A-14) and plugging
it into Eq. (A-10) leads to A0 =0 and B0 =0 . Eq. (4) then ensues from the de ﬁnition of
δ∗
k = αSvk + βSp.
Proof of Corollary 2. To prove this statement, we compare λ and λp under all possible
scenarios for M and γ.W h e n M =1 , λ = σv
2σu
> λp = σv
2σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 since σ2
p > σ2
v.A l o n g
the same lines, when M> 1 and χ =0 (γ =1 ), λ =
√
Mσv
(M+1)σu
> λp =
√
Mσv
(M+1)σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 .
When M> 1 and χ = σ2v
M (γ =0 ), λ = σv
2σu
> λp =
√
Mσv
σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢ (Mσ2p−σ2v )
1
2
2Mσ2p−(M+1)σ2v
since σ2
p > σ2
v
27

implies that 3Mσ4
vσ2
p
(M +2 ) < σ2
v
¡
4Mσ4
v + σ2
vσ2
p
+4 M2σ4
p
¢
. Finally, it can be shown that,
when M> 1 and χ ∈
³
0, σ2v
M
´
(γ ∈ (0, 1))o r χ > σ2v
M (γ ∈
¡
− 1
M−1 , 0
¢
), λ =
σ2v
√
M[σ2
v
+M(M−1)χ]
1
2
σu[σ2v (M+1)+M(M−1)χ] >
λp =
α
1
2 σv (σ2p−σ2v )
1
2
σuσp[2+(M−1)γp] where γp =
σ2p(σ2
v
−Mχ)−σ4v
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
and α =
Mσ2v (σ2
p
−σ2v )
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
. In addition,
limM→∞ λ − λp =0 , since both variables converge to zero at the limit.
Proof of Remark 1. W e prove this remark under all possible scenarios for M and
γ.W h e n M =1 , ∂λp
∂σp
= σ3v
2σ2pσu
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢− 1
2 > 0 since σ2
p > σ2
v.W h e n M> 1 and χ =
0 (γ =1 ), ∂λp
∂σp
=
√
Mσ3v
(M+1)σ2pσu
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢− 1
2 > 0.W h e n M> 1 and χ = σ2v
M (γ =0 ), ∂λp
∂σp
=
√
Mσ3v [σ4
v
(M+1)+σ2p(σ2
v
+2M2σ2p−5Mσ2v )]
σ2pσu[2σ2p−(M+1)σ2v ]
2
¡
Mσ2
p − σ2
v
¢− 1
2 since σ4
v (M +1 )+ σ2
p
¡
σ2
v +2 M2σ2
p
¢
> −5Mσ2
v.
When M> 1 and χ ∈
³
0, σ2v
M
´
(γ ∈ (0, 1))o r χ > σ2v
M (γ ∈
¡
− 1
M−1 , 0
¢
), it can be shown that
∂λp
∂σp
yields a positive function of σp, σv, M,a n d χ under the assumptions of Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
Finally, in all of the above scenarios, limσp→∞ λp = λ.
Proof of Remark 2. We p r ove t hi s r e ma r k byﬁrst comparing the equilibrium λp
when either γ =1 (χ =0 )o r γ =0 (χ = σ2
v
M ). If speculators’ signals are perfectly cor-
related, then λp =
√
Mσv
(M+1)σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 ; if speculators’ private signals are uncorrelated, then
λp =
√
Mσv
σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢ (Mσ2
p−σ2

). If speculators’ signals are perfectly cor-
related, then λp =
√
Mσv
(M+1)σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 ; if speculators’ private signals are uncorrelated, then
λp =
√
Mσv
σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢ (Mσ2
p−σ2
v )
1
2
2Mσ2p−(M+1)σ2v
. It then follows that it exists a unique σ2∗
p > σ2
v > 0 such
that λp >
√
Mσv
(M+1)σuσp
¡
σ2
p − σ2
v
¢1
2 if σ2
p > σ2∗
p ,g i v e nb yσ2∗
p = M+1
M σ2
v. More generally, it can be
s h o w nt h a ti te x i s t sau n i q u eχ∗ =
³
1 − σ2
v
σ2p
´
σ2
v
M < σ2
v
M (i.e., γ∗ = σ2
v
σ2pM−(M−1)σ2v
> 0) such that
∂λp
∂χ ≥ 0 for χ ≤ χ∗ (i.e., ∂λp
∂γ ≤ 0 for γ ≥ γ∗) and negative (i.e., ∂λp
∂γ > 0) otherwise. Hence, λp is
negatively related to γ ∈ [0, 1] for large σ2
p and positively related to γ ∈ [0, 1] for small σ2
p,s i n c e
limσp→∞ γ∗ =0 and limσp→σv γ∗ =1 , while λp is always positively related to γ ∈
¡
− 1
M−1 , 0
¢
for
any σ2
p.
Proof of Corollary 3. The statement of the corollary follows from ∂λs
∂σp
= −2σ2
v
σ3p
< 0 for
any M and γ.F u r t h e r m o r e ,limσp→∞ λs =0 .
References
[1] Admati, A., and P ﬂeiderer, P., 1988, A Theory of Intra day Trading Patterns: Volume and
Price Variability,Review of Financial Studies,1 ,3 - 4 0 .
[2] Andersen, T., and Bollerslev, T., 1998, Deutsche Mark-Dollar Volatility: Intraday Activ-
ity Patterns, Macroeconomic Announcements, and Longer Run Dependencies, Journal of
Finance, 53, 219-265.
28

[3] Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F., and Labys, P., 2003, Modeling and Forecasting
Realized Volatility,Econometrica, 71, 579-626.
[4] Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F., and Vega, C., 2003, Micro E ﬀects of Macro An-
nouncements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,American Economic Review,
93, 38-62.
[5] Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F., and Vega, C., 2004, Real-Time Price Discovery in
Stock, Bond, and Foreign Exchange Markets, W orking Paper, Northwestern University.
[6] Aruoba, B., 2004, Empirical Properties of M acroeconomic Revisions, W orking Paper, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania.
[7] Back, K., Cao, H., and Willard, G., 2000, Imperfect Competition Among Informed Traders,
Journal of Finance, 55, 2117-2155.
[8] Balduzzi, P., Elton, E., and Green, C., 2001, Economic News and Bond Prices: Evidence
From the U.S. Treasury Market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 36, 523-
543.
[9] Bandi, F., and Russell, J., 2005, Separating Microstructure Noise from Volatility, Journal
of Financial Economics,f o r t h c o m i n g .
[10] Berry, T., Howe, K., 1994, Public Information Arrival, Journal of Finance, 49, 1331-1346.
[11] Boyd, J., Hu, J., and Jagannathan, R., 2005, The Stock Market’s Reaction to Unemployment
News: Why Bad News Is Usually Good For Stocks, Journal of Finance, 60, 649-672.
[12] Brandt, M., and Kavajecz, K., 2004, Price Discovery in the U.S. Treasury Market: The

et’s Reaction to Unemployment
News: Why Bad News Is Usually Good For Stocks, Journal of Finance, 60, 649-672.
[12] Brandt, M., and Kavajecz, K., 2004, Price Discovery in the U.S. Treasury Market: The
Impact of Order Flow and Liquidity on the Yield Curve, Journal of Finance, 59, 2623-2654.
[13] Brenner, M., Pasquariello, P., and Subra hmanyam, M., 2005, Financial Markets and the
Macro Economy, W orking Paper, Ross School of Business, University of Michigan.
[14] Chowdhry, B., and Nanda, V., 1991, Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity, Review of
Financial Studies,4 ,4 8 3 - 5 1 1 .
[15] Croushore, D., and Stark, T., 1999, A Real-Time Data Set of Macroeconomists: Does the
Data Vintage Matter? Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia W orking Paper No. 99-21.
[16] Croushore, D., and Stark, T., 2001, A R eal-Time Data Set of Macroeconomists, Journal of
Econometrics, 105, 111-130.
[17] Diamond, D., and V errecchia, R., 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital,
Journal of Finance, 46, 1325-1359.
29

[18] Diebold, F., and Li, C., 2003, Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond Yields,
Journal of Econometrics,f o r t h c o m i n g .
[19] Diether, K., Malloy, C., and Scherbina, A., 2002, Di ﬀerences of Opinion and the Cross
Section of Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 57, 2113-2141.
[20] Du ﬀee, G., 2002, Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in A ﬃne Models, Journal of
Finance, 57, 405-443.
[21] Easley, D., Hvidkjaer, S., and O’Hara, M., 2002, Is Information Risk a Determinant of Asset
Returns? Journal of Finance, 57, 2185-2221.
[22] Estrella, A., and Mishkin, F., 1998, Predicting U.S. Recessions: Financial Variables as
Leading Indicators, Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 45-61.
[23] Evans, M., and Lyons, R., 2002, Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy,1 1 0 ,1 7 0 - 1 8 0 .
[24] Evans, M., and Lyons, R., 2003, How is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates, NBER
W orking Paper No. 9433.
[25] Evans, M., and Lyons, R., 2004, Exchange Rate Fundamentals and Order Flow, W orking
Paper, Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley.
[26] Faust, J., Rogers, J., and W right, J., 2003, News and Noise in G-7 GDP Announcements,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking ,f o r t h c o m i n g .
[27] Fleming, M., 1997, The Round-the-Clock Market of U.S. Treasury Securities, Economic
Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 3, 9-32.

f Money, Credit and Banking ,f o r t h c o m i n g .
[27] Fleming, M., 1997, The Round-the-Clock Market of U.S. Treasury Securities, Economic
Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 3, 9-32.
[28] Fleming, M., 2003, Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity, Economic Policy Review, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, 83-108.
[29] Fleming, M., and Remolona, E., 1997, What Moves the Bond Market? Economic Policy
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 31-50.
[30] Fleming, M., and Remolona, E., 1999, Price Formation and Liquidity in the U.S. Treasury
Market: The Response to Public Information, Journal of Finance, 54, 1901-1915.
[31] Foster, F., and Viswanathan, S., 1990, A Theory of the Interday Variations in Volume,
Variance, and Trading Costs in Securities Markets,Review of Financial Studies,3 ,5 9 3 - 6 2 4 .
[32] Foster, F., and Viswanathan, S., 1993, The E ﬀect of Public Information and Competition
on Trading Volume and Price Volatility, Review of Financial Studies,6 ,2 3 - 5 6 .
30

[33] Foster, F., and Viswanathan, S., 1996, Strategic Trading When Agents Forecast the Fore-
casts of Others, Journal of Finance, 51, 1437-1478.
[34] Garman, Mark B., 1976, Market Microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics ,3 ,2 5 7 -
275.
[35] Goldreich, D., Hanke, B., and Nath, P., 2005, The Price of Future Liquidity: Time-Varying
Liquidity in the U.S. Treasury Market, Review of Finance,f o r t h c o m i n g .
[36] Goodhart, C., and O’Hara, M., 1997, High Frequency Data in Financial Markets: Issues
and Applications, Journal of Empirical Finance,4 ,7 3 - 1 1 4 .
[37] Green, C., 2004, Economic News and the Impact of Trading on Bond Prices, Journal of
Finance, 59, 1201-1233.
[38] Gri ﬃths, M., Smith, B., Turnbull, D., and White, R., 2000, The Costs and the Determinants
of Order Aggressiveness, Journal of Financial Economics, 56, 65—88.
[39] Hasbrouck, J., 1991, Measuring The Information Content of Stock Trades, Journal of Fi-
nance, 46, 179-207.
[40] Hasbrouck, J., 2003, Intraday Price Formation in U.S. Equity Index Markets, Journal of
Finance, 58, 2375-2399.
[41] Hasbrouck, J., 2004, Economic and Statistical Perspectives on the Dynamics of Trade in
Securities Markets, Teaching Notes, Stern School of Business, New York University.
[42] Kallberg, J., and Pasquariello, P., 2004, T ime-Series and Cross-Sectional Excess Comove-
ment in Stock Indexes, W orking Paper, Ross School of Business at University of Michigan.

rk University.
[42] Kallberg, J., and Pasquariello, P., 2004, T ime-Series and Cross-Sectional Excess Comove-
ment in Stock Indexes, W orking Paper, Ross School of Business at University of Michigan.
[43] Kavajecz, K., and Collins, S., 1995, Rationality of Preliminary Money Stock Estimates,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 32-41.
[44] Kim., O., and Verrecchia, R., 1994, Market Liquidity and Volume around Earnings An-
nouncements, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 17, 41-67.
[45] Kim., O., and Verrecchia, R., 1997, Pre-Announcement and Event-Period Private Informa-
tion, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 24, 395-419.
[46] Koski, J., and Michaely, R., 2000, Prices, Liquidity, and the Information Content of Trades,
Review of Financial Studies, 13, 659-696.
[47] Kuttner, K., 2001, Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed
Funds Futures Market,Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523-544.
31

[48] Kyle, A., 1985, Continuous A uctions and Insider Trading, Econometrica, 53, 1315-1335.
[49] Lee, C., and Ready, M., 1991, Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data, Journal of
Finance, 46, 733-746.
[50] Lucas, R., 1982, Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country W orld, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 10, 335-359.
[51] Mankiw, N., Runkle, D., and Shapiro, M., 1984, Are Preliminary Announcements of the
Money Stock Rational Forecasts?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 14, 15-27.
[52] McKelvey, R., Page, T., 1990, Public and Private Information: An Experimental Study of
Information Pooling, Econometrica, 58, 1321-1339.
[53] Moulton, P., 2004, Relative Repo Specialness in U.S. Treasuries, Journal of Fixed Income ,
14, 40-47.
[54] Mork, K., 1987, Ain’t Behavin’: Forecast Errors and Measurement Errors in Early GNP
Estimates, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics ,5 ,1 6 5 - 1 7 5 .
[55] Mork, K., 1990, Forecastable Money-Growth Revisions: A Closer Look at the Data, Cana-
dian Journal of Economics, 23, 593-616.
[56] Morris, S., and Shin, H., 2002, Social Value of Public Information, American Economic
Review, 92, 1521-1534.
[57] Novshek, W., 1984, Finding All n-Firm Cournot Equilibria,International Economic Review,
25, 61-70.
[58] Ranaldo, A., 2004, Order Aggressiveness in Limit Order Book Markets, Journal of Financial
Markets,7 ,5 3 - 7 4 .
[59] Zarnowitz, V., and Lambros, L., 1987, Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic Prediction,

o, A., 2004, Order Aggressiveness in Limit Order Book Markets, Journal of Financial
Markets,7 ,5 3 - 7 4 .
[59] Zarnowitz, V., and Lambros, L., 1987, Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic Prediction,
Journal of Political Economy, 95, 591-621.
32

Table 1. GovPX Transaction Data: Summary Statistics
In this table we report the mean, standard deviation, maximum, minimum, and ﬁrst-order autocorrelation
coeﬃcient ( ρ(1)) for the following variables: Two-year, ﬁve-year and ten-year on-the-run daily yields (in per-
centage, i.e., multiplied by 100), daily yield changes (in b asis points, i.e., multiplied by 10,000), number of buys,
number of sells, daily net order ﬂow Ωt (number of buys minus number of sells), daily abnormal order ﬂow, and
the daily number of transactions. The daily abnormal, or unanticipated order ﬂow (de ﬁn e di nS e c t i o n4a sΩ∗
t )
is computed by aggregating over each day t all half-hour intraday residuals from the estimation of the linear
autoregressive model of Hasbrouck (1991) in Eq. (8). The data source is GovPX. Our sample period starts in
January 2, 1992 and ends in December 29, 2000, for a total of 2,246 daily observations.
Mean Stdev. Max. Min. ρ(1)
Two-Year
Daily Yield×100 5.49 0.89 7.73 3.70 0.998
Daily Yield Change ×10, 000 0.05 6.10 35.10 -31.10 0.041
Number of Buys 202.07 80.00 604 25 0.559
Number of Sells 170.77 69.89 640 17 0.533
Order Flow 31.30 37.38 204 -89 0.088
Abnormal Order Flow 0.00 33.74 187.58 -102.49 0.032
Number of Transactions 372.84 145.50 1244 44 0.578
Five-Year
Daily Yield×100 5.97 0.74 7.90 3.98 0.996
Daily Yield Change ×10, 000 -0.01 6.39 35.10 -29.30 0.044
Number of Buys 324.70 127.36 816 34 0.633
Number of Sells 289.41 114.47 737 33 0.631

.578
Five-Year
Daily Yield×100 5.97 0.74 7.90 3.98 0.996
Daily Yield Change ×10, 000 -0.01 6.39 35.10 -29.30 0.044
Number of Buys 324.70 127.36 816 34 0.633
Number of Sells 289.41 114.47 737 33 0.631
Order Flow 35.29 49.53 278 -127 0.128
Abnormal Order Flow 0.00 47.85 262.72 -129.44 -0.007
Number of Transactions 614.11 237.05 1423 88 0.654
Ten-Year
Daily Yield×100 6.26 0.74 8.03 4.16 0.997
Daily Yield Change ×10, 000 -0.04 5.99 33.60 -23.00 0.044
Number of Buys 281.70 109.03 693 34 0.710
Number of Sells 260.55 102.44 553 22 0.692
Order Flow 21.14 36.45 153 -105 0.160
Abnormal Order Flow 0.00 40.29 142.98 -105.38 0.038
Number of Transactions 542.25 208.41 1246 73 0.718
33

Table 2. Macroeconomic News Announcements and Dispersion of Beliefs
In this table we report the number of observations, source, and release time for the 25 U.S. macroeconomic
announcements in our sample. We also report summary stati stics for the corresponding standard deviation across
professional forecasts, our proxy for dispersion of belie fs among market participants, whenever available. Specif-
ically, we report the mean, standard deviation, Spearman rank correlation with the Nonfarm Payroll standard
deviation (
ρ(Payroll)), and the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation coe ﬃcient ( ρ(1)) for each series SDjt .A “ ∗ ”, “
∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate the latter two measures’ signi ﬁcance at 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. The release
time in the table, in Eastern St andard Time (EST, with Daylight savings time starting on the ﬁrst Sunday of
April and ending on the last Sunday of October), is constant throughout the sample except in the following
circumstances: In 01/94, the personal i ncome announcement time moved from 10:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; beginning
in 01/96, consumer credit was released regularly at 3:00 p.m. while prior to this date, its release times varied; in
12/93, the personal consumption expenditures announceme nt time moved from 10:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; whenever
GDP is released on the same day as durable goods orders, the durable goods orders announcement is moved to

nal consumption expenditures announceme nt time moved from 10:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; whenever
GDP is released on the same day as durable goods orders, the durable goods orders announcement is moved to
10:00 a.m.; on 07/96 the durable goods orders announcement was released at 9:00 a.m.; in 01/97, the business
inventory announcement was moved from 10:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; beginning in 3/28/94, the fed funds rate was
released regularly at 2:15 p.m., while prior to this date , the release times varied. The sources for the MMS data
are: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Bureau of the Ce nsus (BC), Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Federal
Reserve Board (FRB), National Association of Purcha sing Managers (NAPM), Conference Board (CB), Finan-
cial Management O ﬃce (FMO), and Employment and Training Administration (ETA). The standard deviation
across professional forecasts of Capacity Utilization, P ersonal Income, Consumer Credit, Personal Consumption
Expenditures, Business Inventories, Government Budget, and Target Federal Funds Rate (announcements 7, 8,
9, 11, 15, 16, and 24) is not available.
34

Tabl e 2 (Continued).
Obs. Source Time Mean Stdev. ρ(Pa y r o l l) ρ(1)
Quarterly Announcements
1- GDP Advance 36 BEA 8:30 0.480 0.170 0.162 ∗ -0.181
2- GDP Preliminary 34 BEA 8:30 0.313 0.178 0.014 0.192
3- GDP Final 35 BEA 8:30 0.128 0.051 0.083 0.250
Monthly Announcements
Real Activity
4- Nonfarm Payroll 108 BLS 8:30 41.814 14.212 1.000 0.424 ∗∗∗
5- Retail Sales 108 BC 8:30 0.302 0.158 0.109 0.047
6- Industrial Production 107 FRB 9:15 0.183 0.135 0.236
∗∗ 0.358∗∗∗
7- Capacity Utilization 107 FRB 9:15 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
8- Personal Income 105 BEA 10:00/8:30 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
9- Consumer Credit 108 FRB 15:00 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Consumption
10- New Home Sales 106 BC 10:00 19.270 10.235 0.151 0.099
11- Pers. Cons. Exp. 107 BEA 10:00/8:30 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Investment
12- Durable Goods Orders 106 BC 8:30/9:00/10:00 1.034 0.333 0.077 0.412 ∗∗∗
13- Factory Orders 105 BC 10:00 0.587 0.577 0.219 ∗∗ 0.015
14- Construction Spending 105 BC 10:00 0.499 0.253 0.176 ∗ 0.192∗∗∗
15- Business Inventories 106 BC 10:00/8:30 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Government Purchases
16- Government Budget 107 FMO 14:00 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Net Exports
17- Trade Balance 107 BEA 8:30 0.790 0.851 0.122 0.018
Prices
18- Producer Price Index 108 BLS 8:30 0.130 0.049 0.186 ∗ 0.287∗∗∗
19- Consumer Price Index 107 BLS 8:30 0.086 0.051 0.146 0.221 ∗∗
Forward-Looking
20- Consumer Conf. Index 106 CB 10:00 1.646 0.609 0.079 0.230 ∗∗
21- NAPM Index 107 NAPM 10:00 0.961 0.303 0.242 ∗∗ 0.382∗∗∗

nsumer Price Index 107 BLS 8:30 0.086 0.051 0.146 0.221 ∗∗
Forward-Looking
20- Consumer Conf. Index 106 CB 10:00 1.646 0.609 0.079 0.230 ∗∗
21- NAPM Index 107 NAPM 10:00 0.961 0.303 0.242 ∗∗ 0.382∗∗∗
22- Housing Starts 106 BC 8:30 0.045 0.038 0.160 0.246 ∗∗∗
23- Index of Leading Ind. 108 CB 8:30 0.202 0.137 0.134 0.480 ∗∗∗
Six-Week Announcements
24- Target Fed Funds Rate 71 FRB 14:15 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Weekly Announcements
25- Initial Unemp. Claims 459 ETA 8:30 7.973 5.440 0.069 0.578 ∗∗∗
35

Table 3. Dispersion of Beliefs and Traders Aggressiveness
In this table we report estimates of the following equation:
NTt = bhDht + blDlt + bm(1 − Dht − Dlt)+ εt,
where NTt is the number of transactions on day t, Dht (Dlt) is a dummy variable equal to one on days with
high (low) dispersion of beliefs de ﬁned as the forecasts’ standard deviation to be on the top (bottom) 70 th
(30th) percentile of its empirical distribution, and zero otherwise. We measure the degree of heterogeneity
of beliefs in a given month using three di ﬀerent methodologies. First, we only use the standard deviation of
forecasts of the Nonfarm Payroll Employment report. S econd, we aggregate the standard deviation of forecasts
across seven “inﬂuential” macroeconomic announcements: Nonfarm Payroll Employment, Retail Sales, New Home
Sales, Consumer Conﬁdence Index, NAPM Index, Index of Leading Indicators, and Initial Unemployment Claims.
Third, we aggregate the forecasts’ standard deviation a cross all available macroeconomic news announcements
underlined in Table 2. R2
a is the adjusted R2. All reported coe ﬃcient estimates for bh, bm,a n d bl are statistically
signiﬁcant at the 1% level. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate signiﬁcance of the di ﬀerence bh − bl at the 10%, 5%,
or 1% level, respectively, using the Newey-West standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
Announcement bh bm bl bh − bl R2
a
Two-Year
Nonfarm Payroll Employment 366.687 362.978 374.983 -8.296 86.05%
s.e.

, using the Newey-West standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
Announcement bh bm bl bh − bl R2
a
Two-Year
Nonfarm Payroll Employment 366.687 362.978 374.983 -8.296 86.05%
s.e. 5.729 4.811 5.773 8.133
Inﬂuential Announcements 317.836 372.472 409.360 -91.524 ∗∗∗ 86.80%
s.e. 5.596 4.684 5.665 7.963
All Announcements 321.120 362.468 421.500 -100.38 ∗∗∗ 86.95%
s.e. 5.543 4.655 5.659 7.921
Five-Year
Nonfarm Payroll Employment 603.503 570.535 648.080 -44.576 ∗∗∗ 85.73%
s.e. 9.475 7.958 9.541 13.447
Inﬂuential Announcements 562.774 626.650 599.127 -36.353 ∗∗∗ 85.54%
s.e. 9.617 8.044 9.721 13.675
All Announcements 534.212 607.237 657.696 -123.484 ∗∗∗ 85.91%
s.e. 9.459 7.937 9.642 13.507
Ten-Year
Nonfarm Payroll Employment 530.563 505.908 570.922 -40.359 ∗∗∗ 85.56%
s.e. 8.353 7.015 8.411 11.854
Inﬂuential Announcements 496.024 554.288 527.157 -31.132 ∗∗∗ 85.55%
s.e. 8.490 7.096 8.576 12.068
All Announcements 452.617 546.248 584.260 -131.643 ∗∗∗ 86.20%
s.e. 8.266 6.931 8.420 11.799
36

Table 4. Market Liquidity on Non-announcement Days
In this table we report estimates of the f ollowing regression model (Eq. (11)):
rt = a +
XN
i=0
λhiΩ∗
t−iDht +
XN
i=0
λliΩ∗
t−iDlt +
XN
i=0
λmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dht − Dlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where rt =( yt −yt−1)×100 is the daily change in bond yields, Ω∗
t is unanticipated order ﬂow (deﬁned in Section 4), Dht (Dlt) is a dummy variable
equal to one on non-announcement days (de ﬁned in Section 4.1) with high (low) dispersion of beliefs, de ﬁned as the forecasts’ standard deviation to
be on the top (bottom) 70 th (30th) percentile of its empirical distribution, and zero otherwise, and N =5 . We measure the dispersion of beliefs
in each trading day of a given month using three di ﬀerent methodologies. In the ﬁrst, we only use the standard deviation of professional forecasts
of the Nonfarm Payroll Employment report. In the second, we aggr egate the standard deviations of forecasts of seven “in ﬂuential” macroeconomic
announcements (listed in Section 3.2.2). In the third, we aggregate the sta ndard deviations of forecasts across all macroeconomic news announcemen ts
for which the standard deviation across professional forecasters is available (underlined in Table 2). R2
ha (R2
la)i st h ea d j u s t e dR2 conditional on
high (low) dispersion days, while R2
a is the adjusted R2 including all observations. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate signi ﬁcance at the 10%, 5%,

(R2
la)i st h ea d j u s t e dR2 conditional on
high (low) dispersion days, while R2
a is the adjusted R2 including all observations. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate signi ﬁcance at the 10%, 5%,
or 1% level, respectively, using the Newey-West standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
37

Tabl e 4 (Continued).
Announcement λh0 λm0 λl0 λh0 − λl0
P5
i=0 λhi
P5
i=0 λmi
P5
i=0 λli R2
ha R2
la R2
a
Two-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.213 ∗∗∗ -0.182∗∗∗ -0.121∗∗∗ -0.092∗∗∗ -0.161∗∗ -0.182∗∗∗ -0.072 28.54% 6.66% 21.69%
s.e. 0.033 0.025 0.034 0.048 0.067 0.050 0.056
Inﬂuential -0.140 ∗∗∗ -0.108∗∗∗ -0.080∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗ -0.106∗∗∗ -0.096∗∗∗ -0.049∗∗ 14.61% 10.65% 15.52%
s.e. 0.016 0.010 0.010 0.019 0.031 0.022 0.022
All -0.122 ∗∗∗ -0.093∗∗∗ -0.098∗∗∗ -0.024 -0.152 ∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗ 15.46% 16.92% 15.83%
s.e. 0.017 0.012 0.014 0.022 0.032 0.024 0.027
Five-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.210 ∗∗∗ -0.153∗∗∗ -0.085∗∗∗ -0.125∗∗∗ -0.285∗∗∗ -0.136∗∗∗ 0.019 41.38% 9.65% 23.30%
s.e. 0.029 0.022 0.027 0.040 0.078 0.049 0.062
Inﬂuential -0.151 ∗∗∗ -0.122∗∗∗ -0.087∗∗∗ -0.064∗∗∗ -0.142∗∗∗ -0.106∗∗∗ -0.050∗∗ 19.14% 11.97% 20.31%
s.e. 0.014 0.010 0.010 0.018 0.036 0.022 0.025
All -0.155 ∗∗∗ -0.097∗∗∗ -0.102∗∗∗ -0.053∗∗∗ -0.167∗∗∗ -0.079∗∗∗ -0.083∗∗∗ 21.37% 18.76% 19.40%
s.e. 0.017 0.012 0.013 0.022 0.041 0.027 0.029
Ten-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.170 ∗∗∗ -0.129∗∗∗ -0.071 -0.099 -0.192 ∗∗ -0.269∗∗∗ -0.017 15.10% 1.02% 10.29%
s.e. 0.043 0.032 0.043 0.061 0.093 0.058 0.079
Inﬂuential -0.081 ∗∗∗ -0.093∗∗∗ -0.079∗∗∗ -0.002 -0.075 ∗∗ -0.109∗∗∗ -0.053 2.83% 4.72% 6.05%
s.e. 0.018 0.013 0.013 0.025 0.035 0.027 0.042
All -0.075 ∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗ -0.071∗∗∗ -0.004 -0.109 ∗∗ -0.119∗∗∗ -0.097∗∗ 3.82% 4.43% 6.16%
s.e. 0.023 0.017 0.019 0.029 0.053 0.033 0.038
38

Table 5. Market Liquidity in Announcement and Non-announcement Days
In this table we report estimates of the f ollowing regression model (Eq. (12)):
rt = a +
XN
i=0
λiΩ∗
t−i(1 − DPt )+
XN
i=0
λpiΩ∗
t−iDPt +
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where rt =( yt − yt−1) × 100 is the daily change in bond yields, Ω∗
t is unanticipated order ﬂow (de ﬁn e di nS e c t i o n4 ) ,DPt is a dummy variable
equal to one if either the Nonfarm Payroll Employment report ( P =1 ), any of the seven “in ﬂuential” announcements listed in Section 3.2.2 ( P =7 ),
or any of the announcements for which the standard devia tion across professional forecasters is available ( P =1 8, underlined in Table 2) is released
on day t and equal to zero otherwise, and N =5 . R2
f (R2
fp )i st h ea d j u s t e dR2 from the estimation of Eq. (12) over just non-announcement
(announcement) days, while R2
a is the adjusted R2 from the estimation of the fully speci ﬁed regression above. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate
signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively, using the Newey-West standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
39

Tabl e 5 (Continued).
Announcement λ0 λp0 λ0 − λp0
P5
i=0 λi
P5
i=0 λpi R2
f R2
fp R2
a
Two-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.108 ∗∗∗ -0.087∗∗∗ -0.021 -0.131 ∗∗∗ -0.013 15.31% 6.47% 14.72%
s.e. 0.021 0.027 0.034 0.041 0.064
Inﬂuential -0.103 ∗∗∗ -0.112∗∗∗ 0.009 -0.075 ∗∗∗ -0.059∗∗∗ 15.34% 12.29% 13.98%
s.e. 0.008 0.008 0.011 0.016 0.019
All -0.102 ∗∗∗ -0.109∗∗∗ 0.007 -0.096 ∗∗∗ -0.059∗∗∗ 16.00% 13.24% 13.99%
s.e. 0.011 0.006 0.013 0.023 0.015
Five-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.124 ∗∗∗ -0.168∗∗∗ 0.044∗∗ -0.121∗∗∗ -0.242∗∗∗ 21.03% 19.61% 21.37%
s.e. 0.017 0.025 0.019 0.043 0.062
Inﬂuential -0.117 ∗∗∗ -0.137∗∗∗ 0.020∗ -0.095∗∗∗ -0.137∗∗∗ 19.88% 20.88% 20.76%
s.e. 0.007 0.008 0.011 0.017 0.020
All -0.115 ∗∗∗ -0.131∗∗∗ 0.016 -0.107 ∗∗∗ -0.115∗∗∗ 20.29% 20.48% 20.70%
s.e. 0.011 0.006 0.012 0.024 0.016
Ten-Year
Nonfarm Payroll -0.087 ∗∗∗ -0.053∗ -0.034 -0.181 ∗∗∗ -0.020 6.74% 3.59% 7.07%
s.e. 0.025 0.030 0.048 0.049 0.088
Inﬂuential -0.086 ∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗ 0.000 -0.083 ∗∗∗ -0.086∗∗∗ 6.73% 5.73% 6.52%
s.e. 0.010 0.011 0.015 0.021 0.026
All -0.077 ∗∗∗ -0.090∗∗∗ 0.013 -0.103 ∗∗∗ -0.076∗∗∗ 7.08% 5.99% 6.49%
s.e. 0.014 0.009 0.017 0.030 0.019
40

Table 6. Public Signals and Market Liquidity
In this table we report estimates of the f ollowing regression model (Eq. (14)):
rt = a +
XP
j=1
λsj Sjt +
XN
i=0
λphiΩ∗
t−iDht +
XN
i=0
λpliΩ∗
t−iDlt
+
XN
i=0
λpmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dht − Dlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where rt =( yt − yt−1) × 100 is the daily change in bond yields, Ω∗
t is unanticipated order ﬂow (de ﬁn e di nS e c t i o n4 ) ,Dht (Dlt)i sad u m m y
variable equal to one on days with high (low) dispersion of beliefs (de ﬁn e di nS e c t i o n3 . 2 . 2 ) ,a n dz e r oo t h e r w i s e ,a n dN =5 . W ee s t i m a t et h e
above equation using only announcement days (de ﬁned in Section 4.2). The coe ﬃcient λsp is the estimated price impact of the Nonfarm Payroll
announcement ( P =1 ) or the average estimated impact across either the “in ﬂuential” (P =7 )o ra l l( P =1 8 ) macroeconomic announcements
for which the standard deviation across professional forecasters is available (i.e., those underlined in Table 2). R2
fh a (R2
fla )i st h ea d j u s t e dR2
conditional on high (low) dispersion days and only using Ω∗
t , R2
fa is the unconditional adjusted R2 using only Ω∗
t ,a n d R2
a is the adjusted R2 of
the fully speci ﬁed regression above. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate signi ﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively, using the Newey-West
standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
41

Tabl e 6 (Continued).
Announcement λsp λph0 λpm0 λpl0 λph0 − λpl0
P5
i=0 λphi
P5
i=0 λpmi
P5
i=0 λpli R2
fh a R2
fla R2
fa R2
a
Two-Year
Nonfarm Pay. 6.279 ∗∗∗ -0.141∗∗ -0.117∗∗ -0.116 -0.025 ∗ 0.087 -0.301 ∗∗∗ -0.055 7.81% -8.04% 8.51% 40.87%
s.e. 0.883 0.060 0.047 0.092 0.014 0.151 0.113 0.176
Inﬂuential 2.805 ∗∗∗ -0.179∗∗∗ -0.08∗∗∗ -0.106∗∗∗ -0.073∗∗∗ -0.152∗∗∗ -0.063∗∗ -0.040 15.86% 9.57% 13.54% 30.27%
s.e. 0.322 0.019 0.012 0.016 0.024 0.047 0.031 0.036
All 1.490 ∗∗∗ -0.165∗∗∗ -0.092∗∗∗ -0.093∗∗∗ -0.072∗∗∗ -0.130∗∗∗ -0.030 -0.055 ∗∗ 16.65% 14.50% 13.79% 26.70%
s.e. 0.196 0.015 0.010 0.012 0.020 0.034 0.026 0.027
Five-Year
Nonfarm Pay. 6.028 ∗∗∗ -0.220∗∗∗ -0.179∗∗∗ -0.117∗∗ -0.103∗∗∗ -0.209 -0.253 ∗∗∗ -0.087 11.45% -4.37% 14.46% 46.68%
s.e. 0.855 0.065 0.042 0.049 0.034 0.161 0.097 0.138
Inﬂuential 2.670 ∗∗∗ -0.184∗∗∗ -0.111∗∗∗ -0.124∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗ -0.202∗∗∗ -0.129∗∗∗ -0.083∗∗ 24.16% 15.27% 21.45% 34.00%
s.e. 0.318 0.017 0.012 0.015 0.023 0.048 0.030 0.038
All 1.259 ∗∗∗ -0.183∗∗∗ -0.111∗∗∗ -0.124∗∗∗ -0.059∗∗∗ -0.192∗∗∗ -0.100∗∗∗ -0.083∗∗∗ 23.94% 24.78% 21.83% 31.27%
s.e. 0.194 0.014 0.010 0.012 0.019 0.039 0.025 0.027
Ten-Year
Nonfarm Pay. 4.195 ∗∗∗ -0.239∗∗ -0.017 0.076 -0.315 ∗∗ -0.157 0.040 0.109 -10.27% -3.53% 0.26% 22.81%
s.e. 0.815 0.097 0.081 0.105 0.143 0.206 0.178 0.224
Inﬂuential 2.445 ∗∗∗ -0.103∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.072∗∗∗ -0.031 -0.130 ∗∗ -0.064∗ -0.038 3.55% 5.33% 5.58% 16.95%
s.e. 0.329 0.024 0.018 0.023 0.033 0.062 0.039 0.057

97 0.081 0.105 0.143 0.206 0.178 0.224
Inﬂuential 2.445 ∗∗∗ -0.103∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.072∗∗∗ -0.031 -0.130 ∗∗ -0.064∗ -0.038 3.55% 5.33% 5.58% 16.95%
s.e. 0.329 0.024 0.018 0.023 0.033 0.062 0.039 0.057
All 1.329 ∗∗∗ -0.117∗∗∗ -0.079∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.049∗∗ -0.120∗∗ -0.070∗∗ -0.014 4.26% 6.71% 6.31% 15.04%
s.e. 0.199 0.021 0.014 0.018 0.021 0.051 0.032 0.037
42

Table 7. Public Signal Noise and Market Liquidity
In this table we report estimates of the f ollowing regression model (Eq. (14)):
rt = a + λsnhSptDnht + λsnlSptDnlt + λsnmSpt(1 − Dnht − Dnlt)+
XN
i=0
λpnhiΩ∗
t−iDnht
+
XN
i=0
λpnliΩ∗
t−iDnlt +
XN
i=0
λpnmiΩ∗
t−i(1 − Dnht − Dnlt)+
XN
i=1
βirt−i + εt,
where rt =( yt − yt−1) × 100 is the daily change in bond yields, Ω∗
t is the unanticipated order ﬂow (deﬁn e di nS e c t i o n4 ) ,Dnht (Dnlt)i sad u m m y
variable equal to one on days with high (low) public signal noise (de ﬁned in Section 3.2.3 using news rev isions), and zero otherwise, and N =5 .
We estimate Eq. (14) just for Nonfarm Payroll, Industrial Production, and C apacity Utilization, since no other revisions (from RTDS) are available.
R2
sa is the adjusted R2 using public news as the only explanatory variable. R2
fn h a (R2
fn l a)i st h ea d j u s t e dR2 of using contemporaneous order ﬂow
alone in high (low) public signal noise days. R2
a is the adjusted R2 of the fully speci ﬁed model above. A “ ∗ ”, “ ∗∗ ”, or “ ∗∗∗ ” indicate signi ﬁcance
at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively, using the Newey-West standard errors reported below each coe ﬃcient estimate (s.e.).
43

Tabl e 7 (Continued).
Ann. λsnh λsnm λsnl λpnh0 λpnm0 λpnl0
P5
i=0 λpnhi
P5
i=0 λpnmi
P5
i=0 λpnli R2
sa R2
fn h a R2
fn l a R2
a
Two-Year
Non. P. 6.861 ∗∗∗ 7.569∗∗∗ 5.205∗∗∗ -0.132∗ -0.164∗∗∗ -0.108∗ -0.105 -0.378 ∗∗∗ 0.041 32.67% 39.24% 39.00% 46.88%
s.e. 1.678 1.288 1.609 0.067 0.050 0.062 0.191 0.140 0.152
In. P. 1.672 ∗ 1.468 0.820 -0.075 ∗ -0.106∗∗∗ -0.130∗∗ 0.037 0.154 ∗ -0.008 2.38% 10.93% 9.50% 23.40%
s.e. 0.916 1.035 1.337 0.043 0.034 0.058 0.092 0.090 0.116
Cap. U. 1.643 1.399 2.123 -0.072 -0.092 ∗∗∗ -0.097 0.113 0.075 0.052 9.01% 18.20% 18.80% 25.73%
s.e. 1.011 0.866 1.521 0.045 0.030 0.069 0.105 0.070 0.114
Five-Year
Non. P. 5.959 ∗∗∗ 5.513∗∗∗ 4.267∗∗∗ -0.196∗∗∗ -0.212∗∗∗ -0.210∗∗∗ -0.411∗∗ -0.343∗∗∗ -0.290∗∗∗ 26.77% 39.16% 38.21% 51.06%
s.e. 1.580 1.202 1.546 0.052 0.053 0.052 0.158 0.131 0.111
Ind P. 1.251 0.233 0.916 -0.099 ∗∗ -0.157∗∗∗ -0.122∗ -0.035 0.048 -0.096 2.44% 22.80% 20.82% 23.05%
s.e. 0.963 1.125 1.597 0.043 0.034 0.067 0.113 0.094 0.138
Cap. U. 1.466 0.152 1.956 -0.128 ∗∗ -0.152∗∗∗ -0.085 -0.053 0.065 -0.135 7.66% 27.80% 24.85% 28.06%
s.e. 0.904 0.962 1.588 0.053 0.031 0.063 0.106 0.085 0.163
Ten-Year
Non. P. 3.702 ∗∗ 3.165∗∗ 4.225∗∗ -0.139 -0.078 0.036 -0.566 ∗∗ 0.267 0.116 20.88% 21.29% 19.84% 27.62%
s.e. 1.648 1.209 1.615 0.101 0.087 0.085 0.220 0.182 0.183
Ind. P. 0.281 2.025 ∗ 1.940 0.059 -0.117 -0.131 ∗ 0.020 -0.071 0.036 3.70% 5.47% 7.69% -0.96%
s.e. 0.991 1.084 1.538 0.077 0.073 0.078 0.142 0.11 0.143
Cap. U.

.615 0.101 0.087 0.085 0.220 0.182 0.183
Ind. P. 0.281 2.025 ∗ 1.940 0.059 -0.117 -0.131 ∗ 0.020 -0.071 0.036 3.70% 5.47% 7.69% -0.96%
s.e. 0.991 1.084 1.538 0.077 0.073 0.078 0.142 0.11 0.143
Cap. U. 1.365 1.174 2.456 ∗ -0.013 -0.057 -0.148 ∗∗ 0.013 -0.022 -0.09 8.15% 7.44% 10.64% 6.03%
s.e. 0.994 1.008 1.443 0.089 0.058 0.074 0.137 0.103 0.135
44

Figure 1. Equilibrium without and with a Public Signal
In this ﬁgure we plot the market liquidity parameter de ﬁn e di nP r o p o s i t i o n1 ,λ = σ2v
σuσs
√
M[2+(M−1)γ] in Figure 1A, and the di ﬀerence between
the sensitivity of the equilibrium price to the order ﬂow in the absence and in the presence of a public signal Sp, λ − λp in Figure 1B, as a function of
the degree of correlation of the speculators’ signals, γ, in the presence of M =1 , 2,o r 4 speculators, when σ2
v = σ2
u =1 . According to Proposition
1, λ = σ2
v
σuσs
√
M[2+(M−1)γ] , while λp =
α
1
2 σv (σ2
p−σ2
v )
1
2
σuσp[2+(M−1)γp] in Proposition 2, where γp =
σ2
p(σ2
v
−Mχ)−σ4
v
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
and α =
Mσ2
v (σ2
p
−σ2
v )
σ2p[σ2v +M(M−1)χ]−σ4v
.S i n c e
σ2
s = σ2
v +M(M−1)χ
M2 , σss = σ2
v −Mχ
M2 ,a n d γ = σ2
v −Mχ
σ2v +M(M−1)χ , the range of correlations compatible with a positive de ﬁnite Σs is obtained by varying
the parameter χ = σ2
s − σss within the interval [0, 10] when M =2 ,a n dt h ei n t e r v a l[0, 5] when M =4 .
A) λ B) λ − λp
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
-1 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
gamma
lambda
M = 1
M = 2
M = 4
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.26
-1 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
gamma
lambda - lambda_p
M = 1
M = 2
M = 4
45
