Do designated market makers provide liquidity
during downward extreme price movements? ∗
Mario Bellia Kim Christensen Aleksey Kolokolov Loriana Pel izzon
Roberto Ren` o†
February, 2025
Abstract
We study the trading activity of designated market makers (D MMs) in electronic mar-
kets using a unique dataset with audit-trail information on trader classiﬁcation. DMMs
may either adhere to their market-making agreements and oﬀer immediacy during periods
of heavy selling pressure, or they might lean-with-the-win d to proﬁt from private infor-
mation. We test these competing theories during extreme (do wnward) price movements,
which we detect using a novel methodology. We show that DMMs p rovide liquidity when
the selling pressure is concentrated on a single stock, but c onsume liquidity (leaving liq-
uidity provision to slower traders) when several stocks are aﬀected.
JEL classiﬁcation : G10, G14.
Keywords: Designated market makers (DMMs); extreme price movements (EPMs); high-
frequency traders (HFTs); liquidity provision.
∗We thank Giovanni Cespa, Jean-Eduard Colliard, Maria Flora, Thierr y Foucault, John Hendershott, Fabrizio
Lillo, Katya Malinova, Paolo Pasquariello, Athena Picarelli, Ryan Riordan , Andriy Shkilko, Xavier Vives, Ingrid
Werner, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, Stevens Institute of Technology
Business School, University of Trento, University of Bolzano, and p articipants at the 31st SNDE Annual Sympo-

r participants at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, Stevens Institute of Technology
Business School, University of Trento, University of Bolzano, and p articipants at the 31st SNDE Annual Sympo-
sium (Padova, 2024); the XX Workshop on Quantitative Finance (Zu rich, 2019); the 46th EF A Annual Meeting
(Lisbon, 2019); and the 16th Paris December Finance Meeting (Par is, 2018) for valuable comments. We are solely
responsible for any errors and omissions. Bellia: European Commissio n, Joint Research Centre, and Department
of Economics, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy, bellia@unive.it. Christensen: Department of Economics
and Business Economics, Aarhus University, Denmark, kim@econ.au.dk. Kolokolov: Alliance Manchester Busi-
ness School, Manchester, UK, and New Economic School, Moscow, R ussia, alexeiuo@gmail.com. Pelizzon:
Leibniz Institute for Financial Research SAFE, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, and Department of Eco-
nomics, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy. pelizzon@safe.uni-frankfurt.de. Ren` o: ESSEC Business
School, Paris, France, reno@essec.edu. Christensen was funded by a grant from the Independent Resea rch Fund
Denmark (DFF 1028–00030B). Kolokolov and Pelizzon acknowledge f unding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG–329107530). Pelizzon and Ren` o acknowledge fundin g from the Italian Ministry for University and
Research (MUR–2017RSMPZZ). Pelizzon also is grateful to the Leib niz Institute for Financial Research SAFE,

530). Pelizzon and Ren` o acknowledge fundin g from the Italian Ministry for University and
Research (MUR–2017RSMPZZ). Pelizzon also is grateful to the Leib niz Institute for Financial Research SAFE,
funded by the State of Hessen initiative for research, for ﬁnancia l support. Part of this work was carried out
when Bellia was employed at the SAFE research center and Ren` o was employed at the Department of Economics
of the University of Verona, Italy. Disclaimer: The views rendered in this paper are strictly those of the authors
and may not in any circumstance be regarded as stating an oﬃcial po sition of the European Commission.
†Corresponding author
arXiv:2602.01817v1 [econ.EM] 2 Feb 2026

1 Introduction
Market makers facilitate the allocation of wealth and transfer of ris k in ﬁnancial markets, where
participants may not otherwise be able to immediately locate a counte rparty to take the opposite
side of a deal. While any intermediary can supply liquidity on a voluntarily b asis, today market
making is overwhelmingly done by electronic traders, some of whom ma y commit to becoming
a “designated market maker” (DMM) by entering into a written agre ement with the exchange
to oﬀer immediacy to its customers.
1
In this paper, we study the behavior of such electronic DMMs to exa mine whether they
act according to their mandate during downward “extreme price mo vements” (EPMs), where
stocks are selling oﬀ. Rather than maintaining a passive order ﬂow du ring such EPMs, DMMs
may decide to abstain from providing liquidity in extreme market condit ions, or even switch to
a “lean-with-the-wind” strategy with aggressive selling activity. Fo r example, Cespa & Vives
(2025) show that liquidity providers may lean-with-the-wind if the market la cks transparency.
In these circumstances, the fear of trading against private infor mation overshadows the foreseen
revenue earned by providing liquidity, which increases market fragilit y. Further explanations for
opportunistic trading include the backrunning theory of Yang & Zhu (2020) or predatory trading
of Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2005). Is the incentive economic presented to DMMs suﬃcient to

lanations for
opportunistic trading include the backrunning theory of Yang & Zhu (2020) or predatory trading
of Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2005). Is the incentive economic presented to DMMs suﬃcient to
overcome such eﬀects? Moreover, DMMs often overlap with “high- frequency traders” (HFTs),
as is also the case in our sample. The literature provides evidence of t he lean-with-the-wind
behavior of HFTs (e.g., van Kervel & Menkveld 2019 , Korajczyk & Murphy 2019 ). Which of
these eﬀects prevail for DMMs?
1The exact role of the DMM and the details of such agreements vary a cross exchanges.
1

We provide compelling empirical evidence to suggest that the willingnes s of DMMs to supply
liquidity in such a situation depends on the cross-sectional extent o f the EPM. When it aﬀects
only a single stock, DMMs stick to their agreement and oﬀer immediacy . However, when it aﬀects
several stocks, DMMs reverse course and start to consume liquid ity. In their place, traditional
“slow” traders start to purchase shares, presumably to take ad vantage of the discounted price.
A policy implication of our study is thus that the compensation scheme oﬀered by the exchange
is not always a suﬃcient incentive for DMMs to maintain their presence during such adverse
market conditions, and not even to discourage them from additiona l selling.
We analyze a unique dataset from the BEDOFIH database. 2 It consists of tick-by-tick order-
level data on 37 liquid French stocks from the CAC 40 Index and trad ed on NYSE Euronext Paris
in 2013. The data are stamped with a ﬂag indicating whether a particip ant is a HFT or not, and
whether the participation falls under a DMM scheme or not—as deter mined by the French market
authority, Autorit´ e des March´ es Financiers(2017); AMF henceforth. Furthermore, it contains a
trader category provided by NYSE Euronext (explained in Section 3). This granularity permits
us to uncover the trading activity of various market participants, including DMMs.
A distinctive feature of our study is the deﬁnition of EPMs. In this pa per, we rely on the

This granularity permits
us to uncover the trading activity of various market participants, including DMMs.
A distinctive feature of our study is the deﬁnition of EPMs. In this pa per, we rely on the
“drift burst” approach of Christensen et al. (2022), which identiﬁes periods where market prices
are trending sharply. We investigate in detail the behavior of diﬀere nt trader groups during the
downward EPMs detected by this statistic. We use only downward EP Ms, because they are
more likely to be associated with ﬁnancial distress (see Huang & Wang 2009 ). We show that
drift burst EPMs are mostly originated by proprietary trading from investment banks, or by
2www.euroﬁdai.org/en/high-frequency-data-bedoﬁh.
2

their clients trading via sponsored access. 3 This trading is, on average, informed, since it leads
to a permanent change in the fundamental price.
In general, our results relate to a vast literature dealing with liquidity provision in electronic
markets. This literature looks at the behavior of algorithmic trader s, in particular HFTs, and
broadly suggests that electronic traders enhance both market e ﬃciency (see, e.g., Chaboud et al.
2014) and market liquidity (see, e.g., Hendershott et al. 2011 , Jones 2013 , Clark-Joseph et al.
2017, Bessembinder et al. 2020 ).
However, the beneﬁcial impact of algorithmic trading on market liquid ity has recently been
challenged. Anand & Venkataraman (2016) show that liquidity provision is highly correlated
among HFTs, which increases the fragility of the market. They conc lude that DMMs tend to
mitigate illiquidity when HFTs withdraw synchronously from the market . In our framework,
DMMs are also HFTs, and we show that DMMs do not always maintain the ir passive order ﬂow
and actually resort to aggressive selling when downward movements spread across stocks. Thus,
we provide evidence that the HFT dimension prevails over designated liquidity provision.
An important closely related paper is Brogaard et al. (2018), who study HFT liquidity pro-
vision during EPMs. They label a 10-second return as an EPM if it belon gs to the 99 .9th
percentile of the absolute return distribution or is detected by the Lee & Mykland (2008) jump

liquidity pro-
vision during EPMs. They label a 10-second return as an EPM if it belon gs to the 99 .9th
percentile of the absolute return distribution or is detected by the Lee & Mykland (2008) jump
test.4 Hence, they concentrate on HFTs during high volatility- and jump-b ased EPMs. We
complement their paper in two directions. First, we look at drift burs t-based EPMs. The drift
burst EPMs is a largely diﬀerent sample with limited overlap (see Append ix A for an in-depth
3We refer to “client” when a NYSE Euronext member is granting a coun terparty access to the market via
an Automated Routing System or a sponsored access.
4For alternative deﬁnitions of an EPM, see Goldstein & Kavajecz (2004) and Gao & Mizrach (2016).
3

comparison). This is because the testing procedure is based on the drift term, and thus identi-
ﬁes directional price moves, while it controls for volatility and exclude s jumps. It allows us to
extract a sequence of consecutive returns around which the mar ket is directional. This has the
advantage, important to our analysis, that we can exploit the time s eries dimension of our data,
such as identifying the peak of an EPM, allowing us to disentangle vario us stages of its develop-
ment. Moreover, our approach does not require us to ﬁx the dura tion of the EPM in advance.
Second, we concentrate on DMMs. Brogaard et al. (2018) conclude that HFTs provide liquidity,
on average, during EPMs, but they switch to the demand side if seve ral stocks are aﬀected.
Our empirical analysis complements their ﬁndings by disentangling liquid ity provision by trader
group. We show that the incentive for liquidity provision is not suﬃcien t to prevent DMMs from
acting as non-designated market maker HFTs, thus casting the co mpensation scheme oﬀered by
the exchange into doubt.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the institutional structure
of NYSE Euronext. In Section 3, we describe the data and presents the trader classiﬁcation.
In Section 4, we describe the identiﬁcation of drift burst EPMs. The econometr ic approach
and our empirical results appear in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6. In Appendix A, we

er classiﬁcation.
In Section 4, we describe the identiﬁcation of drift burst EPMs. The econometr ic approach
and our empirical results appear in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6. In Appendix A, we
compare the drift burst EPMs to those detected by Brogaard et al. (2018). Appendix B contains
supplementary material. In Appendix C, we implement an alternative model to analyze trading
activity based on Kirilenko et al. (2017), which largely conﬁrms the ﬁndings in the main text.
4

2 Institutional structure
2.1 The NYSE Euronext market
NYSE Euronext operates as an order-driven stock market with a lim it order book. The Paris
division of the exchange includes all French instruments, including eq uities and derivatives. The
daily trading schedule for the most liquid stocks is divided into diﬀerent segments. The session
starts at 7:15 a.m. with a pre-opening phase, followed by an auction a t 9:00 a.m. The main
trading phase starts at 9:00 a.m. and ends at 5:30 p.m. The daily sched ule is followed by a
closing auction and a further trading session called “trading-at-las t,” where additional trades
can be executed at the closing price. In this study, we only look at th e main trading phase,
where the vast majority of trading activity is concentrated, thus opening and closing activity
are excluded from our analysis.
According to the Rule 4403/2 of Rule Book I (
Euronext 2025), during the continuous trading,
Euronext has in place a set of trading safeguards that prevents p rice movements outside certain
thresholds. Speciﬁcally, traded prices are constrained into a “colla r,” deﬁned by a reference price
plus/minus a percentage price change. If the execution of an orde r causes the breach of the collar,
two outcomes are possible: 1) the order is partially executed inside t he collar, without halting
the continuous trading; 2) the trading process is halted, and the m arket is put in “reservation
mode.” Continuous trading resumes after a new auction.

lly executed inside t he collar, without halting
the continuous trading; 2) the trading process is halted, and the m arket is put in “reservation
mode.” Continuous trading resumes after a new auction. None of th e EPMs included in our
analysis trigger any of these measures. Thus, the collars are ineﬀe ctive against preventing the
occurrence of our detected events.
The Euronext group is the second-largest stock exchange in Euro pe (behind the LSE Group)
5

and ranks ﬁfth globally (the top four being NYSE, NASDAQ, the Japa n Exchange Group, and
the LSE Group) according to data from the World Federation of Exc hanges and Statista. The
French branch, Euronext Paris, accounts for approximately 70% of the total market capital-
ization of the Euronext group, positioning the domestic market as a top 10 stock exchange
worldwide on a standalone basis. Additionally, the markets exhibit leve ls of HFT activity com-
parable to those in the United States. In our sample, HFTs account for roughly 80% of the euro
trading volume. Brogaard (2010) reports that HFTs contribute to 68.5% of the dollar volume
traded in the U.S. equities market, while Benos & Sagade (2012) ﬁnd a much smaller partici-
pation in a small sample of U.K. stocks (27% of all trading volume). Menkveld (2014) posits,
based on several sources, that HFT participation has grown from 30% to 70% in recent years.
We conclude that the documented results for Euronext Paris ough t to generalise to other limit
order book markets, especially given the relative size of the market and the signiﬁcance of the
HFT activity therein. 5
2.2 The contractual role of DMMs
The market model of NYSE Euronext Paris relies on the provision of liq uidity by electronic mar-
ket makers. Since 2011, the NYSE Euronext operates a program c alled Supplemental Liquidity
Provision (SLP), where electronic traders can agree to post two- sided quotes during the day and

ronic mar-
ket makers. Since 2011, the NYSE Euronext operates a program c alled Supplemental Liquidity
Provision (SLP), where electronic traders can agree to post two- sided quotes during the day and
to provide a minimum passive execution volume. This program, describ ed below, identiﬁes our
DMMs. The orders sent by DMMs must be electronic, use only their ow n funds, and exclude
5As of 2013, NYSE Euronext Paris ranks ﬁfth in the world in terms of m arket capitalization based on
information from the World Federation of Exchanges. Bellia et al. (2025) show that in our sample HFTs account
for around 82% of the gross turnover.
6

customer orders. 6 We emphasize that the agreement does not contain any special ince ntive for
DMMs to provide liquidity during market distress. However, a recent review report by the Eu-
ropean Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) is now looking into t his design (see ESMA
2021).
The SLP program was introduced in 2012 with the aim of protecting th e market share
of NYSE Euronext against other trading venues, such as Chi-X Eur ope, BATS Europe, and
Equiduct. The Flash News of March 26, 2012 ( NYSE-Euronext 2012 ) covers the details of
the implementation of the scheme, while the Flash News of May 9, 2013 (NYSE-Euronext
2013) introduces new requirements and also extends the possibility of jo ining the program to
other market participants starting June 3, 2013. The program init ially required that each ﬁrm
appointed as an SLP must commit to being present on one or more bas kets of stocks and fulﬁll
the following three rules: 1) be present at least 95% of the time on bo th sides of the market
during the continuous trading session; 2) display a minimum volume of a t least 5,000 euros at
the best limit; and 3) be present at the best limit prices for each assig ned basket of securities,
with a minimum time presence of 10% for each security. The program w as revised in June 2013
with signiﬁcant changes to Rule 3. The exchange introduced a minimum passive execution level
(liquidity provision) of 0.70% in terms of the aggregate monthly volume traded on Chi-X, BATS,

n June 2013
with signiﬁcant changes to Rule 3. The exchange introduced a minimum passive execution level
(liquidity provision) of 0.70% in terms of the aggregate monthly volume traded on Chi-X, BATS,
Turquoise, and NYSE Euronext, a minimum presence time of 25% at th e NYSE Euronext best
limit for each assigned basket, weight-averaged over the entire ba sket and calendar month, and
a minimum passive execution level of 0.1%, as well as a minimum presence time of 10%, at
6In contrast to the NYSE (US) market, the NYSE Euronext Paris do es not have a single DMM for each stock,
but relies on multiple DMMs that act as non-voluntarily liquidity provider s under a market making agreement
with the exchange.
7

the NYSE Euronext best limit during the continuous trading session f or each security, weight-
averaged over the calendar month.
If DMMs meet the criteria, the minimum charge when they take liquidity is 0.30 bps and
the maximum rebate for liquidity provision is 0.20 bps until May 2013, wh ich increased to 0.22
bps from June 3, 2013. These amounts represent the bounds for fees and rebates. There are
intermediate levels that can reduce the rebate or increase the fee s up to 0.55 bps per trade,
depending on the time presence and passive executions. Indeed, 0 .55 bps per trade is the
standard fee for both taking and providing liquidity. Additionally, the time priority of orders
at the best limit price is not considered when determining SLP members ’ presence at the inside
spread: as soon as there is an order at the top of the book ﬂagged as SLP, the presence is
counted.
Since August 1, 2012, the French government has imposed a ﬁnanc ial transaction tax (FTT)
of 20 bps on the purchase of French equities, along with an HFT tax. HFTs can avoid this
taxation by either not holding inventories or signing an agreement wit h the exchange to perform
market-making duties. If, after a certain period (2 months in the in itial implementation), SLP
members do not fulﬁl the requirements or their performance is belo w the commitment, the
exchange terminates the contract. The member’s activity will then be charged at 0.55 bps per

lementation), SLP
members do not fulﬁl the requirements or their performance is belo w the commitment, the
exchange terminates the contract. The member’s activity will then be charged at 0.55 bps per
order executed, regardless of whether it provides or takes liquidit y. Other discounts for colocation
and the dedicated data feed infrastructure will also be terminated if a member is excluded from
the SLP program.
Overall, with the time presence (95% of the time on both sides of the b ook, at any level) and
top of the book presence (10% of the time, weighted average acro ss one month), the requirements
8

provide substantial leeway for DMMs to move their quotes to a lower level or withdraw from
the market in the case of extreme price movements without incurrin g substantial penalties.
3 Data description
The database at our disposal is from the Base Europ´ eenne de Don n´ ees Financi` eres ` a Haute
Fr´ equence (BEDOFIH). It is composed of tick-by-tick order-level data for 37 liquid stocks that
are included in the CAC 40 Index in 2013.
7 We can track the entire history of all orders, from the
initial submission to the execution or cancellation, with a timestamp at the microsecond level.
Each trade struck during the main trading phase has a ﬂag indicating the initiator, allowing
us to identify which trader-account is trading aggressively (deman ding liquidity) and passively
(supplying liquidity) for the matched order.
Euronext requires each trader to ﬂag every order in compliance wit h the Rule Book I, ac-
cording to the following list of possible categories (see NYSE-Euronext 2012 ): orders submitted
pursuant to the Supplemental Liquidity Provision agreement (MM); own account (OWN) for
proprietary trading; account of an aﬃliate, or when operating fro m a parent company of the
Euronext main member (PARENT); 8 account of a third party (CLIENT), when the Euronext
member grants access to the client via an Automated Routing Syste m or through sponsored
7Three stocks on the CAC 40 Index are excluded from our analysis: A rcelor Mittal, Gemalto, and Solvay,

ronext
member grants access to the client via an Automated Routing Syste m or through sponsored
7Three stocks on the CAC 40 Index are excluded from our analysis: A rcelor Mittal, Gemalto, and Solvay,
since their main trading venue is not the Paris branch of NYSE Eurone xt.
8From Rule 3.4 of Rule Book I, the “Relevant Euronext Market Undert aking may consider an application
from a Member who wishes to obtain direct access to an Euronext Ma rket for its Aﬃliate(s). The Aﬃliates are
a person who (i) owns 95 per cent or more of the Member; or (ii) is own ed 95 per cent or more by the Member;
or (iii) is owned 95 per cent or more by a third party who also owns 95 pe r cent or more of the Member.”
9

access;9 or orders submitted for retail investors only. 10
An intriguing feature of this database is that individual orders from the stock exchange are
labelled with a high-frequency trading (HFT) identiﬁcation ﬂag from t he French stock market
regulator AMF. The classiﬁcation is based on the lifetime of cancelled o rders. A trader is
classiﬁed with the HFT mark if one of two criteria is met:
1. The average lifetime of its cancelled orders is less than the averag e lifetime of all orders in
the book and if it has cancelled at least 100,000 orders during the yea r.
2. The participant must have cancelled at least 500,000 orders with a lifetime of less than 0.1
second (i.e., the participant quickly updates the orders in the limit ord er book) and the
top percentile of the lifetime of its cancelled orders must be less than 500 microseconds
(i.e., the participant regularly uses fast access to the market).
The HFTs are further divided into two sub-categories: pure HFT co mpanies, such as Citadel or
Virtu, and investment banks with HFT activity (named “mixed” by AMF ), such as Goldman
Sachs. The classiﬁcation is revised yearly, and the groups are mutu ally exclusive.
[Figure 1 about here.]
9Euronext members can grant access to the market and the facilitie s like co-location, via a sponsored access,
according to Rules 3.2 and 3.3 of Rule Book I. However, “All business u ndertaken by a Client via an Automated

grant access to the market and the facilitie s like co-location, via a sponsored access,
according to Rules 3.2 and 3.3 of Rule Book I. However, “All business u ndertaken by a Client via an Automated
Order Routing System or via Sponsored Access on an Euronext Mar ket will be done in the name of the Member
and the Member retains full responsibility for the conduct of all suc h business” (Rule 3201/2).
10Orders for retail investors are ﬂagged as RLP (Retail Liquidity Pro vider) or RMO (Retail Member Organi-
sation) and belong to a speciﬁc program designated for them. Euro next member banks and brokers can execute
their retail orders ﬂow via the Retail Matching Facility (RMF) against new price-improving liquidity provided
by RLPs. Details about the program are available at https://www.eur onext.com/en/media/4053/download.
However, the amount of liquidity provided via this channel is not visible in the central limit order book and is
only accessible to retail clients under the RMO. The amount of trade s and orders categorized with this ﬂag is
negligible compared to the overall market activity carried out by the remaining trading accounts.
10

We merge the AMF deﬁnition of HFT with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(2014) memorandum, which adds proprietary trading as a typical featur e of HFTs, by grouping
traders into the following categories (also displayed in Figure 1):
• Pure HFT companies—according to AMF—are labelled by their trading c lassiﬁcation, as
PURE-HFT MM, PURE-CLIENT, and PURE-HFT OWN. We remove the ﬂa g “HFT”
from clients given that the AMF classiﬁcation does not guarantee th at these trades are
proprietary. The DMMs in this group are PURE-HFT MM.
• Mixed HFT companies—according to AMF—are labelled IB-HFT MM, IB-C LIENT, IB-
HFT OWN, and IB-HFT PARENT. Again, we remove the ﬂag “HFT” from the clients.
We prefer the label “IB” to “MIXED,” because we believe it adds less c onfusion in the
naming convention of this trader category. The DMMs in this group a re IB-HFT MM.
• Non-HFTs—according to AMF—are labelled NON-HFT CLIENT and NON- HFT OWN.
There are no DMMs in this last category.
We leave out a few trader categories with negligible trading activity (O thers), accounting for
only 0.56% of total volume. Figure 1 shows that most of the trading activity in our sample is
due to PURE-HFT MM, IB-HFT MM, IB-CLIENT, and IB-HFT OWN. Tog ether, they account
for roughly 76% of the total double-counted volume (buy and sell). Non-HFTs account for 18%.
The rest is divided among PURE-HFT OWN, PURE-CLIENT, IB-HFT PAR ENT, and Others.
11

4 EPM detection
The detection of EPMs is based on a recently developed drift burst a pproach proposed by
Christensen et al. (2022), which supports the notion that an EPM is (relative to the level of
volatility) a large movement in the price over a short time horizon.
[Figure 2 about here.]
To illustrate our approach, we look at an example of a detected even t. In the top panel of
Figure 2, we report the evolution of the price of Technip on June 25, 2013. A round 11:50 am
the price starts to decline rapidly until it reaches a minimum a few seco nds after 12:05 pm. The
return over the 15-minute window is -2.35%. After the crash, the p rice retraces somewhat. This
is an example of an EPM that takes the form of a so-called “ﬂash cras h”: a large price drop in a
short time followed by a partial recovery. The intermediate panel s hows the drift burst statistic
of Christensen et al. (2022). The trough of the test statistic coincides with the trough of the
price.
Figure 2 highlights an important diﬀerence between our notion of an EPM comp ared to
Brogaard et al. (2018). Their detection algorithm consists of extracting—often disconn ected—
10-second absolute returns exceeding the 99.9th percentile of th e distribution of such returns for
a stock. However, even though the cumulative price drop is large du ring the drift burst EPM
displayed in Figure 2, the individual high-frequency returns, charted in the bottom pa nel, are

eturns for
a stock. However, even though the cumulative price drop is large du ring the drift burst EPM
displayed in Figure 2, the individual high-frequency returns, charted in the bottom pa nel, are
typically small and in line with the overall volatility of that day. The large st negative 10-second
return (-0.25%) occurs inside the volatility cluster before 11:00 am, where the price level did not
change much in the surrounding 30-minute window, as indicated by th e shaded area. Hence, in
12

this instance, Brogaard et al. (2018) identify the interval with high volatility (or jumps) before
the crash. 11
To explain the mechanics of our EPM identiﬁcation procedure in more d etail, we need a
minimal amount of notation. We assume that ( pt)t≥0 denotes the log-price process of an asset,
which evolves according to the dynamic:
dpt = µtdt + σtdWt + dJt, (1)
where µt is the drift, σt is the volatility, Wt is a standard Brownian motion, and Jt is a jump
process. Such a description of the instantaneous price change is s tandard in the continuous-time
literature. The volatility and jump component are central to Brogaard et al. (2018), while we
concentrate on the drift.
Suppose the log-price is observed on [0 , T ] at irregular time points 0 = t0 < t 1 < . . . < t n = T ,
(pti)n
i=0. An intuitive estimator of the drift is given by
ˆµt = 1
h
n∑
i=1
K
(
ti−1 − t
h
)
rti, (2)
where rti = pti − pti−1, for i = 1 , . . . , n is the discretely sampled log-return on [ ti−1, ti], K is a
kernel function, and h is a bandwidth.
11Appendix A provides a broader in-sample comparison of EPMs detected by the d rift burst test statistic with
those extracted by Brogaard et al. (2018) showing that they largely constitute disjoint sets with limited overla p,
in line with the example.
13

Christensen et al. (2022) propose the drift burst test statistic:
Tt =
√
h
K
ˆµt
ˆσt
, (3)
where
ˆσt =



√
1
h
n∑
i=1
K
(
ti−1 − t
h
)
r2
ti (4)
is an estimator of the volatility and K =
∫ ∞
−∞ K 2(x)dx.
The ratio ˆµt/ˆσt measures the current velocity of the price. In normal markets th e ratio is
small, as evident from Figure 2 in the morning and afternoon. However, if the price starts to
trend too fast relative to the volatility (i.e., price changes are direct ional), the ratio becomes
large, as also evident from Figure 2 during the crash at noon. Christensen et al. (2022) formalize
this idea by assuming that there exists a “drift burst” time point τdb, where µt → ±∞ as
t → τdb. They show that at such points the absolute value of the test stat istic diverges to
inﬁnity. Otherwise, it follows a standard normal distribution. It can therefore be used to
identify drift burst EPMs when the test statistic is larger than an ap propriate quantile of the
standard normal distribution. 12
Christensen et al. (2022) show that the drift burst test statistic is robust to jumps. As ev ident
from equation (3), it also controls for volatility. Hence, our EPM measure does not ide ntify either
jumps or large volatility, but only directional price moves. Furtherm ore, the procedure is robust
12To implement the drift burst test statistic, we set K(x) = exp( −|x|)/BD (x ≤ 0), such that ˆ µt and ˆσt are

arge volatility, but only directional price moves. Furtherm ore, the procedure is robust
12To implement the drift burst test statistic, we set K(x) = exp( −|x|)/BD (x ≤ 0), such that ˆ µt and ˆσt are
computed with a left-sided exponential kernel based on backward -looking data to avoid a look-ahead bias. We
employ a h = 5-minute bandwidth for the mean and a h = 25-minute bandwidth for the volatility. The
transaction price record is pre-averaged following Jacod et al. (2009) to soften the impact of microstructure
noise. The volatility estimator is robustiﬁed with a HAC-type correct ion. This is the default choice in the
MATLAB code made available by Christensen et al. (2022).
14

to market microstructure frictions, such as bid-ask bounce. Mor eover, extensive Monte Carlo
simulations in their paper show that the test is correctly sized, so th at for suﬃciently high values
of the test statistic, the probability of contamination by false posit ives is essentially zero.
We compute the drift burst statistic every second during the trad ing session, searching for
downward EPMs after 9:30 am. We exploit the simulation-based algorit hm from Christensen et al.
(2022) to set a critical value. We follow Brogaard et al. (2018) and use a 99.9% conﬁdence level,
which implies an average critical value of -4.9. A test statistic below th is barrier is labelled a
drift burst EPM.
To calculate the duration of an EPM, we denote by ttrough the time point associated with
the lowest (most negative) value of the drift burst test statistic d uring a signiﬁcant event. The
beginning of the EPM, which we call tstart, is identiﬁed as the latest time prior to ttrough that the
test statistic crosses the barrier -1. The diﬀerence τ = ttrough − tstart is the duration of the event.
The drift burst EPM is assumed to stop at tend = ttrough + 3τ . The interval from ttrough to tend is
called the recovery. We further include a pre-event window startin g at time tpre−event = tstart −2τ .
Our analysis of each EPM is based on price and order information from tpre−event to tend.13
5 Empirical investigation
In this section, we ﬁrst present a brief description of the drift bur st EPM sample.

r analysis of each EPM is based on price and order information from tpre−event to tend.13
5 Empirical investigation
In this section, we ﬁrst present a brief description of the drift bur st EPM sample. Then, we
test competing theories about DMM liquidity provision during EPMs usin g a V AR model for
trading imbalances. Finally, we investigate whether DMM behavior dep ends on the EPMs or
13Below we normalize the time unit of each drift burst EPM with the avera ge duration across events. That is,
each trade time (after subtracting tstart) is multiplied by the average duration and divided by the actual durat ion
of the event. The resulting time unit, still in minutes, is indicated as “a verage elapsed time.”
15

rather high selling pressure.
5.1 Anatomy of a drift burst EPM
Table
1 reports the descriptive statistics of the 148 identiﬁed downward E PMs extracted with
the drift burst procedure. Moreover, an overview of each individu al event is available in Table
B.1 in Appendix B, while in Table B.2, we aggregate them by stock, together with some ﬁrm-
level information. This reveals that drift burst EPMs occur in 34 of t he 37 CAC 40 Index stocks
included in our sample. The largest number of EPMs in a single stock is 10 for Alstom, while
the smallest number is 1 for Legrand. There is no obvious relationship among the number of
EPMs and the stocks’ market capitalization, volatility, or average r eturn.
The duration of a drift burst EPM ranges anywhere from a few minut es to three-quarters
of an hour, with a typical duration of 9 .5 minutes. The price concedes by -1.35%, on average,
which is an enormous move over such a short time interval. In the larg est drop, which occurred
in ST Microelectronics on March 12, 2013, the price changed by -5.18 % over 6.5 minutes, while
during the smallest one, which occurred in Pernod Ricard on October 2, 2013, the price declined
by -0.37% over 3.1 minutes. Table 1 also shows that while the duration of a drift burst EPM
represents only 1.87% of the trading day, it accounts for 5.43% of t he daily trading volume,
nearly 6% of the transaction count, and roughly 21% of the sell-side activity during that day.
[Table 1 about here.]

only 1.87% of the trading day, it accounts for 5.43% of t he daily trading volume,
nearly 6% of the transaction count, and roughly 21% of the sell-side activity during that day.
[Table 1 about here.]
Figure 3 presents a graphical representation of the temporal placement of the drift burst
EPMs over the trading day and the year. This shows that the event s are more or less randomly
16

scattered over time, both intraday and interday, without any ten dency to cluster around speciﬁc
times. In a couple of cases—visible in the ﬁgure—drift burst EPMs aﬀe ct a large number of
stocks in the cross-section, namely on April 17, 2013 (with 14 stoc ks involved) and on September
3, 2013 (with 13 stocks involved). 14,15 In the remainder of the text, we label these 27 events as
“systematic,” while the rest (121 events) are labelled “unsystemat ic.”16
[Figure 3 about here.]
In Figure 4, we plot the average cumulative return for unsystematic and syst ematic drift burst
EPMs, together with a 10%–90% quantile-band computed across ev ents. This ﬁgure provides a
qualitative description of the price process during a drift burst EPM . It is consistent with a drift
burst EPM being partly information-based, as it leads to a permanen t price change. However,
for systematic events there is also evidence of an ineﬃcient market response due to overshooting.
[Figure 4 about here.]
We deﬁne, for each event, the permanent price impact (PPI) as:
PPI = ptend − ptpre−event. (5)
14Figure B.1 in Appendix B shows the development of the equity prices for the 37 companies inc luded in our
sample during these events.
15On April 17, 2013, the French government announced new auster ity budget measures that morning due
to a pessimistic revision of GDP growth; see, e.g., https://lexpansion .lexpress.fr/actualite-economique/ce-qu-il-
faut-retenir-du-nouveau-plan-budgetaire-de-la-france 1404490.html.

s that morning due
to a pessimistic revision of GDP growth; see, e.g., https://lexpansion .lexpress.fr/actualite-economique/ce-qu-il-
faut-retenir-du-nouveau-plan-budgetaire-de-la-france 1404490.html. Meanwhile, to our knowledge the event on
September 3, 2013 cannot be attributed to the release of any sign iﬁcant news. However, crashes in several stocks
without news can be explained by liquidity spillover ( Cespa & Foucault 2014 ).
16As evident from Figure 3, there are additional drift burst EPMs aﬀecting more than one sto ck. However,
we do not label these as systematic, because the number of involve d stocks is rather small (2–4).
17

That is, the log-return from start to ﬁnish of each event. 17 Furthermore, the downward price
impact (DPI) of the drift burst EPM is given by
DPI = pttrough − ptpre−event, (6)
while the transient price impact (TPI) is:
TPI = DPI − PPI = pttrough − ptend. (7)
To understand who contributes to the PPI and TPI, we further su bdivide the drift burst EPM
(from tstart to ttrough) into three stages with equal duration: early, intermediate, and la te. This
is also indicated in Figure 4.
In Panel A of Figure 5, we look at the relation between the PPI and TPI. PPI is mostly
negative, which is again indicative of informed trading, while TPI is alway s negative (with a
single exception), which is again indicative of overshooting. The aver age PPI and TPI are both
highly signiﬁcantly negative, which holds for unsystematic and syste matic drift burst EPMs
separately. Indeed, on average, TPI is -0.78% for a systematic ev ent, or about half of the PPI,
and it is -0.33% for an unsystematic event, or roughly one third of th e PPI. Panel B of Figure 5
includes a scatter of DPI and the duration of the drift burst EPM, w hich shows a strong negative
association: the longer a drift burst EPM lasts, the more negative is the DPI.
17Taking the price at a later time point to deﬁne the post-event eﬃcien t price follows the convention in the
market microstructure literature, e.g., when estimating eﬀective s preads or measuring price discovery, see Glosten
(1987) or Barclay & Warner (1993).

vent eﬃcien t price follows the convention in the
market microstructure literature, e.g., when estimating eﬀective s preads or measuring price discovery, see Glosten
(1987) or Barclay & Warner (1993). As a robustness check, we also employed the closing price at the e nd of the
day or the next day, as in van Kervel & Menkveld (2019), but this had no discernible eﬀect on the analysis.
18

[Figure 5 about here.]
5.2 Trading imbalance
In this subsection, we investigate the trading behavior of DMMs dur ing drift burst EPMs. We
provide an empirical answer to the main research question of the pa per: Do DMMs provide
liquidity, in keeping with their role, or do they follow their “HFT instinct” ? Their behavior is
synthesised by their trading imbalances (i.e., the net euro amount of their buying and selling
volume), which we analyze with a V AR model.
We break the event window of identiﬁed drift burst EPMs into non-ov erlapping 10-second
intervals, adopting the time frame of
Brogaard et al. (2018). We then analyze the evolution
of the trading imbalance of each trader group. We then calculate th e euro volume of a single
trade t, which is denoted by Vt = Qt · Pt, where Qt is the number of shares traded and Pt is the
transaction price. The trading imbalance for trader category i over a given period is then:
T I i
period =
∑
t∈period
st · Vt, (8)
where st = +1 for a buy order and st = −1 for a sell order.
The interpretation is as follows. A negative trading imbalance before the trough means that a
trader group contributes to the price drop with selling activity (eith er aggressively or passively),
while a positive trading imbalance after the trough indicates it is helping the price to recover
(either aggressively or passively).
18
18The measure is equivalent to the one employed by Brogaard et al. (2018), except they use the number of
traded shares, Qt.

es it is helping the price to recover
(either aggressively or passively).
18
18The measure is equivalent to the one employed by Brogaard et al. (2018), except they use the number of
traded shares, Qt. We further standardize inventories at the stock level to make th em comparable across EPMs.
19

We estimate a G-dimensional vector autoregression (V AR) for the trading imbalan ce across
trader categories, which equation-by-equation reads as follows:
T I i
j,t = αi
0 + FEstock +
5∑
s=1
βi
sDs
j,t +
G∑
g=1
5∑
l=1
γg,lT I g
j,t−l + αiControlsj,t + ǫi
j,t, (9)
where T I i
j,t denotes the trading imbalance of trader category i, computed for the t-th 10-second
interval of the j-th event, FE stock are stock ﬁxed eﬀects, G is the number of trader categories,
Ds
j,t are dummy variables indicating the stage of the drift burst EPM with s ∈ {pre-event, early
drop, intermediate drop, late drop, recovery }. For example, Dlate drop
j,t = 1 if the t-th interval of
the j-th event belong to the period of the late drop, and is 0 otherwise. W e add ﬁve lagged values
of the trading imbalances of each trader category g to account for serial correlation. Controls j,t
include the contemporaneous 10-second return and log-euro volu me, plus the percentage bid-ask
spread.
19 ǫi
j,t is an error term.
We estimate the model after pooling observations into unsystemat ic and systematic drift
burst EPMs. The reported standard errors are heteroskedast icity-robust and clustered at the
stock and date level. In view of the 10-second time interval require d to aggregate the trading
imbalances, we exclude drift burst EPMs with a duration smaller than 1 00 seconds from the
regression.
Table
2 reports selected coeﬃcient estimates of the V AR system. We rest rict attention to

ading
imbalances, we exclude drift burst EPMs with a duration smaller than 1 00 seconds from the
regression.
Table
2 reports selected coeﬃcient estimates of the V AR system. We rest rict attention to
the most active trader categories and group NON-HFT into a single c ategory.20 In Panel A, we
report estimates for the unsystematic drift burst EPMs. Here, I B-HFT OWN displays signiﬁcant
19As for the inventories, we standardize non-dummy variables at the stock level to make them more homoge-
neous.
20The full version of the table with all trader categories is presented in Table B.3 in Appendix B.
20

selling activity at the beginning of the event, followed in a later stage b y IB-CLIENT. IB-HFT
MM supports the market and supplies liquidity in all stages of the drift burst EPM, in agreement
with their role as DMMs. PURE-HFT MM are also liquidity providers, but t o a lesser degree
in terms of statistical signiﬁcance. After the trough of the event , NON-HFT starts signiﬁcantly
buying the market during the partial recovery, arguably to take a dvantage of the discounted
price.
In Panel B, we show the results for the systematic drift burst EPM s. The results are striking.
In line with the above, the coeﬃcients on the early drop dummy and th e intermediate drop
dummy are negative and statistically signiﬁcant for IB-HFT OWN. How ever, as opposed to the
above, the estimated coeﬃcient for the late drop dummy is negative and statistically signiﬁcant
for IB-HFT MM, while the intermediate drop dummy is negative and sta tistically signiﬁcant
for PURE-HFT MM. By contrast, for NON-HFT, the coeﬃcients are positive and statistically
signiﬁcant at all stages of the drop. We interpret these results as follows: The inception of
the drift burst EPM can be associated with selling pressure from IB- HFT OWN (and also IB-
PARENT as shown in Appendix B). In a systematic event, this is—correctly—interpreted by
DMMs as informed trading, so both the PURE-HFT MM and, especially, IB-HFT MM start
to lean-with-the-wind by following suit with opportunistic selling activit y. This is, however, in

ly—interpreted by
DMMs as informed trading, so both the PURE-HFT MM and, especially, IB-HFT MM start
to lean-with-the-wind by following suit with opportunistic selling activit y. This is, however, in
contradiction to their role as DMMs. On the other side, NON-HFT abs orbs some of the selling
pressure in all stages of the event.
[Table 2 about here.]
Figure 6 illustrates the dynamic evolution of the average trading imbalance, c omputed as in
equation ( 8), during a drift burst EPM. Panel A (Panel B) reports the results for unsystematic
21

(systematic) events. As a visual benchmark, we add the average cumulative return from Figure 4
as a grey-colored line. The ﬁgure shows how the selling activity of IB- HFT OWN (together with
IB-CLIENT in the unsystematic setting) can be associated with the beginning of the downturn.
This trading is informed, since it shifts the price toward a lower funda mental value. The graph
further illuminates the diﬀerence in the behavior of PURE-HFT MM and IB-HFT MM.
[Figure 6 about here.]
In Figure 7, we show a histogram of the one-minute changes in the trading imbala nces of
IB-HFT MM, PURE-HFT MM, and IB-HFT OWN during diﬀerent stages o f the drop and
recovery for systematic drift burst EPMs. 21 The ﬁgure shows that IB-HFT OWN mostly sell
at the beginning of the drop, whereas IB-HFT MM start selling immedia tely thereafter. In
particular, IB-HFT MM are always selling in the late drop. In addition, t he ﬁgure shows that
PURE-HFT MM sell at the intermediate stage. These results provide further support for the
notion that PURE-HFT MM tend to warehouse limited inventory, since their changes in trading
imbalances are typically much smaller in magnitude and close to symmetr ic around zero.
[Figure 7 about here.]
To corroborate our analysis, we next dissect the trading imbalance into aggressive and passive
trades (i.e., those trades where the trader group initiated (aggre ssive) or accepted (passive) the
order).

corroborate our analysis, we next dissect the trading imbalance into aggressive and passive
trades (i.e., those trades where the trader group initiated (aggre ssive) or accepted (passive) the
order). Thus, the imbalance of trades initiated ( D = demand) and accepted ( S = supply) by
21Figure B.2 in Appendix B reports the associated results for unsystematic drift burst EPM s.
22

trader category i over a period is given by:
DI i
period =
∑
t∈period
st · Vt · I(t initiated by i) and SI i
period =
∑
t∈period
st · Vt · I(t accepted by i),
(10)
where I(·) is the indicator function.
22
Table 3 provides selected coeﬃcient estimates of the V AR model from equa tion ( 9), where
we replace trading imbalance as the dependent variable with the aggr essive (left-hand side of the
table) and passive (right-hand side of the table) trading imbalances .23 Looking at the left-hand
side with aggressive trading, IB-HFT OWN shows negative and signiﬁc ant coeﬃcients for both
the early and intermediate drops for both unsystematic and syste matic drift burst EPMs. That
this activity ﬂows in the direction of the price change follows from the positive and signiﬁcant
coeﬃcient on Return. In a systematic event, this is followed signiﬁca ntly in the late stage of the
drop by IB-HFT MM. By contrast, for the passive trades, which ar e in the opposite direction of
the return, the estimated coeﬃcients show that only for unsyste matic drift burst EPMs do IB-
HFT MM oﬀer immediacy during all stages. For a systematic event, DM Ms (both PURE-HFT
MM and IB-HFT MM) do oﬀer immediacy, but only to the buy side, since t he sign in front
of the coeﬃcients of their passive trades is mostly negative (and sig niﬁcant for the late drop).
Overall, these results conﬁrm the graphical assessment from Figu re 6. This therefore indicates

front
of the coeﬃcients of their passive trades is mostly negative (and sig niﬁcant for the late drop).
Overall, these results conﬁrm the graphical assessment from Figu re 6. This therefore indicates
that DMMs, even if receiving compensation for providing liquidity, act ually consume it when
the drift burst EPMs are systematic.
[Table 3 about here.]
22Note that T I i
period = DI i
period + SI i
period.
23The full version of the table with all trader groups is reported in Tab les
B.4 – B.5 in Appendix B.
23

Is the behavior of DMMs during drift burst EPMs aﬀected by their pr evious inventory? Is
it aﬀected by the inventory of other traders? To shed light on this q uestion, we conduct a
cross-sectional analysis of trading imbalances by estimating the fo llowing regression:
T I i
Late,k = αi
0 + βiT I i
Intermediate+Early,k +
∑
j
γijT I j
Intermediate+Early,k + αiControlsk + ǫi
k, (11)
where i and j denote trader categories, T I •
period,k is the trading imbalance of group • for the
k-th drift burst EPM in a given period, Controls k is a vector of control variables and ǫi
k is the
error term.
The dependent variable in equation (
11) is the trading imbalance in the late stage of the drift
burst EPM for DMMs (i.e., i = PURE-HFT MM or IB-HFT MM). We add its lagged value to
capture serial correlation. We further include the lagged trading im balance from IB-HFT OWN
and IB-CLIENT (i.e., j = IB-HFT OWN and IB-CLIENT). As in equation ( 9), the control
variables are the contemporaneous return, log-euro volume, and the average percentage bid-ask
spread, measured from the start of the drift burst EPM to the be ginning of the late stage. Thus,
all explanatory variables are lagged in time relative to the dependent variable. We are mostly
interested in the sign of the γ coeﬃcients. A positive sign means that DMMs start selling in
the late stage of the drift burst EPM, when other traders were pr eviously selling. This can be

are mostly
interested in the sign of the γ coeﬃcients. A positive sign means that DMMs start selling in
the late stage of the drift burst EPM, when other traders were pr eviously selling. This can be
interpreted as DMMs adapting their trading activity in the lean-with- the-wind direction based
on observed order ﬂow.
Table 4 shows the coeﬃcient estimates of equation ( 11). The results support the role of
PURE-HFT MM and IB-HFT MM as DMMs for unsystematic drift burst E PMs. Here, the
24

estimated γ coeﬃcients are negative, so capital is ﬂowing from the DMMs toward s competing
traders. The exception is the liquidity from PURE-HFT MM to IB-CLIE NT, which has a
positive coeﬃcient estimate, but it is insigniﬁcant. As expected, we o bserve a strong persistence
in trading imbalances. Moreover, the positive eﬀect of the bid-ask s pread suggests that DMMs
hold positive (or less negative) trading imbalances in more illiquid stocks , which aligns with the
function of a market maker during downward price pressure in such stocks. When the drift burst
EPM is systematic, the outcome is mostly unchanged for PURE-HFT M M, which is consistent
with the evolution of their trading imbalances in Figure 6. However, it is a completely diﬀerent
story for IB-HFT MM, who prey on the previous order ﬂow from IB- HFT OWN and IB-CLIENT.
This in turn leads to negative serial correlation in own trading imbalanc es. Our cross-sectional
analysis thus corroborates our previous ﬁndings.
[Table 4 about here.]
We next examine whether DMMs change their trading behavior during drift burst EPMs com-
pared to normal times. To perform this investigation, we borrow th e framework of Kirilenko et al.
(2017), who employ an error correction model to changes in inventory of diﬀerent trader groups.
They show that HFTs did not alter their behavior during the Flash Cra sh of May 6, 2010. We
apply their econometric model to the 148 drift burst EPMs in our sam ple. The results of the

trader groups.
They show that HFTs did not alter their behavior during the Flash Cra sh of May 6, 2010. We
apply their econometric model to the 148 drift burst EPMs in our sam ple. The results of the
full analysis are presented in Appendix C, but the main message is in line with our previous
ﬁndings, namely that DMMs modify their trading activity during syste matic events, but not
during unsystematic ones.
[Table 5 about here.]
25

What motivates the change of strategy of DMMs and their switch to selling during a sys-
tematic event? If the sudden demand for immediacy is due to private information (some-
thing we can establish, on average, ex-post), then it is rational fo r DMMs to sell, as postu-
lated by the back-running theory of Yang & Zhu (2020) or the predatory trading theory of
Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2005). Support to this hypothesis is provided by Table 5, which
reports the average proﬁt (in euros) during a drift burst EPM for each trader category, together
with an estimate of the standard error. The table shows that IB-H FT MM loses a signiﬁcant
amount of money, on average 2799.72 euros, by oﬀering immediacy d uring an unsystematic drift
burst EPM. They transfer this money, as expected, to IB-HFT OW N, who trade on information
by selling at a higher price. It can be argued that DMMs still proﬁt on a verage, since providing
liquidity in tranquil times should be enough to cover these losses. How ever, if they have the
option to fulﬁll the requirements of the SLP program without facing large losses, it is perfectly
rational for them not to provide liquidity during distress. That is wha t they seem to be doing,
since Table 5 shows that IB-HFT MM avoid losses during systematic events, eﬀec tively passing
the “hot potato” to slow traders.
To provide additional insight on this important question, we calculate the proﬁt and loss

s that IB-HFT MM avoid losses during systematic events, eﬀec tively passing
the “hot potato” to slow traders.
To provide additional insight on this important question, we calculate the proﬁt and loss
(P&L) gross of fees and rebates in each 10-second interval as th e monetary gain or loss on (1)
new trades struck in that window and (2) existing positions from the previous 10-second interval,
assuming a zero initial inventory at the beginning of each event. The mark-to-market is based
on the most recent transaction price available at the end of each int erval. We then estimate a
26

V AR reminiscent to equation ( 9):
PnLi
j,t = αi
0 + FEstock + βiDj,t +
G∑
g=1
5∑
l=1
γg,lPnLg
i,t−l + αiControlsj,t + ǫi
j,t, (12)
where PnL i
j,t is the P&L for trader i in the t-th 10-second interval of the j-th event, FE stock are
stock ﬁxed eﬀects as before, and Dj,t is a dummy, which is equal to one for the entirety of the
drift burst EPM (spanning from the beginning of the pre-event unt il the end of the recovery),
and is zero otherwise. The control variables and lags are as in equat ion (
9). We primarily look
at the βi coeﬃcient. A negative value suggests a trader is losing money during a drift burst
EPM, and vice versa.
Table 6 reports the output of the estimation. In line with our prior expecta tions, the table
shows that IB-HFT MM consistently lose money during unsystematic drift burst EPMs. On the
ﬂip side, PURE-HFT MM actually make a smaller amount, although the lat ter is not statistically
signiﬁcant. By contrast, during a systematic event, both IB-HFT MM and PURE-HFT MM
reap substantial proﬁts, which is mainly at the expense of NON-HFT . The other groups earning
during a systematic event are IB-HFT OWN and, as shown in Appendix B, IB-HFT PARENT,
which arguably crystallize their private information. Interestingly, IB-CLIENT suﬀers on their
behalf, albeit to a much smaller extent.
[Table 6 about here.]
Note that the compensation from the market making agreement do es not oﬀer much of an
economic incentive for DMMs in and of itself.

their
behalf, albeit to a much smaller extent.
[Table 6 about here.]
Note that the compensation from the market making agreement do es not oﬀer much of an
economic incentive for DMMs in and of itself. We estimate the average revenue earned by
supplying liquidity during a drift burst EPM in our sample to be about 30 e uro and 25 euro for
27

PURE-HFT MM and IB-HFT MM. 24 Indeed, even if the DMMs had rested passively on the bid
side in all transactions during the detected drift burst EPMs, the average revenue is a meager
160 euro, which pales in comparison to the potential losses. This est imate does not include the
standard gain from market making activity (i.e., the bid-ask spread) , which is absorbed directly
into the P&L measure in Table 6.
Nevertheless, DMMs still make proﬁts, even if they suﬀer an occas ional loss during a sys-
tematic drift burst EPM. We calculate the 2013 cumulative proﬁt for DMMs and ﬁnd that, not
surprisingly, the DMM business is indeed quite valuable. Their gross pr oﬁts are around 19 mil-
lion euros at the end of the year, which is split into 13.5 million euros for P URE-HFT MM and
5.5 million euros for IB-HFT MM. In net terms (including fees), these y early amounts reduce to
11.6 million euros and 4.9 million euros, respectively. 25
In essence, the compensation from their liquidity provision during no rmal times appears to
be large enough to oﬀset such losses. However, if DMMs suspect th e order ﬂow is coming from
informed trading and they can otherwise meet the requirements of their contractual agreement
with the exchange without penalties, it is of course perfectly ration al for them to withdraw
from the market or even switch to a predatory lean-with-the-wind strategy, choosing to pass the

agreement
with the exchange without penalties, it is of course perfectly ration al for them to withdraw
from the market or even switch to a predatory lean-with-the-wind strategy, choosing to pass the
24We estimate these numbers by multiplying for each drift burst EPM th e liquidity supplied by a DMM with
the relative compensation, which is taken to be 0.20 bps per euro volu me (in 2013, this changed from 0.20 to
0.22 and back again to 0.20), and then averaging across events.
25Since we do not observe the activity of individual DMMs, we have to re ly on the aggregate proﬁt proxy of
all DMMs as a group under the assumption that every DMM fulﬁls their obligations for the calculation of fees
(i.e., they all pay the lowest fee and receive the highest rebate). In the contractual agreements with SLP and
DMM, the fees for DMMs are 0.30 bps for taking activity (aggressive trades) and a rebate (i.e., they receive
a compensation) for liquidity provision (passive trades), which was 0 .20 bps until May 2013, increased up to
0.22 bps in June 2013, and reverted back to 0.20 as of November 201 3. We compute for all stocks of the CAC
40 Index the daily gross proﬁt and loss, which is calculated as the tot al amount (in euro) bought minus the
total amount sold. We assume that a trader starts the day with ze ro inventories, and end-of-day inventories
are mark-to-market at closing price. Net daily proﬁt and loss include s also the fees for the stocks traded at the

sume that a trader starts the day with ze ro inventories, and end-of-day inventories
are mark-to-market at closing price. Net daily proﬁt and loss include s also the fees for the stocks traded at the
auction, which is 0.6 bps for all market participants.
28

obligation of market making (and the losses) onto slow traders. How ever, even if this behavior
is rational, it is suboptimal, because it impairs market eﬃciency, since t he combined selling
pressure temporarily dislocates the market price below its fundame ntal value.
Summarizing, our results point out the limited willingness of DMMs to pro vide liquidity
during a drift burst EPM depends on its cross-sectional extent. T hey provide liquidity during
unsystematic events, but during systematic events PURE-HFT MM and, in particular, IB-HFT
MM start selling in the late phase. Thus, their role as DMMs loses its eﬀe ctiveness exactly
when the market needs it the most. The role of liquidity providers is ins tead assumed by more
traditional slow traders (i.e., NON-HFTs). In conclusion, from a polic y perspective, our results
trigger a question of the eﬀectiveness of the compensation schem e oﬀered by the exchange.
5.3 An analysis of extreme selling pressure
In the previous subsection, we examined the behavior of DMMs durin g the occurrence of high
selling pressure and drift burst EPMs. In this subsection, we study the behavior of DMM s during
high selling pressure. To this end, we identify in our sample non-drift b urst time intervals with
as much—or even more extreme—selling pressure than what we obse rve during a drift burst
EPM. We contrast the behavior of DMMs with other trader categor ies during such episodes to

ime intervals with
as much—or even more extreme—selling pressure than what we obse rve during a drift burst
EPM. We contrast the behavior of DMMs with other trader categor ies during such episodes to
examine whether the drift burst EPMs are more likely a result of the s elling pressure itself or a
heterogeneous reaction of DMMs (and other traders) to it.
We compute an intuitive measure of selling pressure, which for each d ay, stock, and one-
29

minute interval in our sample is deﬁned as follows:
SP (day,stock)
m = γ(stock)
m × min
u=0,1,...,30

 ∑
t∈[m−u,m]
st · Vt

 , (13)
where m runs over a one-minute equispaced partition of the trading day, γ(stock)
m is an intraday
periodicity factor, while st and Vt are as before. That is, for each time instant m, we compute
the signed euro volume over the previous u minutes of trading. Since large sell-side activity may
sustain for diﬀerent amounts of time, we do the calculation for inter vals ranging from one to
thirty minutes, matching the build-up from pre-event to trough of a typical drift burst EPM. To
get a single number for each time point, we take the minimum value, whic h is usually negative
and reﬂects the cumulative selling pressure. We correct SP (day,stock)
m for intraday periodicity in
trading activity by multiplying it by a factor γ(stock)
m that is computed as the reciprocal of the
stock-speciﬁc average value of SP (day,stock)
m for a ﬁxed interval m, where the average is taken over
all days in the sample for each stock. This ensures that the ﬁnal nu mber is comparable over
time and across stocks.
Figure
8 shows the unconditional distribution of SP (day,stock)
m over the entire sample. As
expected, we observe that selling pressure is strongly left-skewe d. Moreover, the distribution
of SP (day,stock)
m conditional on a drift burst EPM is centered at the tail of the uncon ditional
distribution. This shows that the most extreme values of SP (day,stock)

. Moreover, the distribution
of SP (day,stock)
m conditional on a drift burst EPM is centered at the tail of the uncon ditional
distribution. This shows that the most extreme values of SP (day,stock)
m correspond to candidate
times with potential drift burst EPMs.
[Figure 8 about here.]
We extract the 0 .1% of time points with the most extreme selling pressure from the unc on-
30

ditional distribution of SP (day,stock)
m . In each of these time points, we compute the change in the
trading imbalance for each trader group over the time window [ m − u∗, m], where u∗ corresponds
to the argmax of the minimum value selected in equation ( 13). In Panel A of Figure 9, we
show a histogram of the trading imbalance for IB-HFT MM, PURE-HFT MM, and NON-HFT
during extreme selling pressure not identiﬁed as drift burst EPMs. A s a comparison, we show
the corresponding results for unsystematic and systematic drift burst EPMs in Panel B and
Panel C, respectively. This ﬁgure can be compared with the one-min ute changes in the trading
imbalance of IB-HFT MM, PURE-HFT MM, and IB-HFT OWN during diﬀere nt stages of the
drop and recovery for systematic drift burst EPMs in Figure 7.
[Figure 9 about here.]
It is evident that a crucial diﬀerence between the occurrence or n on-occurrence of a drift
burst EPM lies in the actions of NON-HFT. As shown in Panel A, NON-HF Ts support the
market with a lot more capital during extreme selling pressure that d oes not overlap with a
drift burst EPM. Furthermore, even here part of the sell-side act ivity emanates from DMMs
(the distribution of changes in trading imbalances is heavily skewed to the left for IB-HFT MM
and—to a lesser extent—for PURE-HFT MM). So again, we observe t hat DMMs do not always
oﬀer immediacy. The instances in which a drift burst EPM occurs (Pan el B and Panel C),

o the left for IB-HFT MM
and—to a lesser extent—for PURE-HFT MM). So again, we observe t hat DMMs do not always
oﬀer immediacy. The instances in which a drift burst EPM occurs (Pan el B and Panel C),
neither NON-HFTs nor DMMs bring enough money to the table, althou gh NON-HFTs remain
the primary source of liquidity. These ﬁndings indicate that slow trad ers are preventing a larger
price drop when selling pressure is extreme. However, in their absen ce (either when they leave
the order book or their quoted depth is small), a drift burst EPM occ urs. This result reinforces
31

the view that DMMs are not incentivized enough from the compensat ion scheme oﬀered by the
exchange to fully support the market with liquidity when it is demanded the most.
6 Conclusion
This paper shows that DMMs do not always fulﬁl their role as liquidity pr oviders, despite the
fact that this is their mandate. They even consume liquidity when it is n eeded the most. We
apply the novel econometric technique of
Christensen et al. (2022)—the drift burst hypothesis—
to detect 148 downward drift burst EPMs, in which market prices ar e being revised sharply lower
over short time horizons, in the year 2013 of blue-chip companies, w hose shares are traded in
the French equity market. A unique feature of our database is tha t it allows us to separate the
trading activity coming from diﬀerent trader groups.
The results show that DMMs oﬀer immediacy during isolated drift burs t EPMs, as expected,
but they reverse course and start devouring the limit order book a t the late stage of events that
aﬀect multiple stocks, thus shifting to a lean-with-the-wind strate gy. This behavior is diﬀerent
from what DMMs tend do in normal times with a balanced order ﬂow, bu t we argue it is rational.
Indeed, when a drift burst EPM aﬀects several stocks, DMMs tra nsition from buyer to seller
as the event is unfolding, probably to avoid big losses in fear that tra ding is informed, which it
is on average. We thus document DMMs respond in disagreement with the intention of their

to seller
as the event is unfolding, probably to avoid big losses in fear that tra ding is informed, which it
is on average. We thus document DMMs respond in disagreement with the intention of their
contractual market making obligation, which impairs the eﬃcient fun ctioning of the market in
times of need. Indeed, the collective impact of trading activity leads to a nontrivial, but possibly
avoidable, overshooting eﬀect. In place of DMMs, the main trader c ategory that helps to stop
32

the price from dropping in the wake of the signiﬁcant selling pressure , and also aiding with
the recovery, is NON-HFT, who arguably invests from a fundament al valuation perspective and
looking to buy at a discount.
Electronic traders are widely known to oﬀer immediacy with limited net in ventory hovering
around zero. Hence, the risk-bearing capacity of DMMs, which are strictly electronic in the Paris
branch of the NYSE Euronext market, may also be exhausted too r apidly during systematic
market downturns, which can further help to explain their sudden c hange of behavior. In
view of this, our empirical results also bear an important policy implicat ion in this regard and
can be informative for a redesign of the market architecture, or a n entirely diﬀerent structure
(see, e.g., Budish et al. 2015 ), such that DMMs are presented with the right and suﬃcient
incentives to maintain their presence in the market, despite potent ial mark-to-market losses,
during widespread stress.
We recommend an evaluation of the recent MiFID II regulation, which recognizes algorithmic
liquidity provision as a pivotal instrument to the functioning of ﬁnanc ial markets. It endorses
automatic liquidity provision by electronic market makers, imposing bin ding agreements between
the exchange and the trading ﬁrms. We show that this rule, already in place at the NYSE
Euronext Paris stock exchange, is not suﬃcient to prevent drift b urst EPMs. This suggests that

eements between
the exchange and the trading ﬁrms. We show that this rule, already in place at the NYSE
Euronext Paris stock exchange, is not suﬃcient to prevent drift b urst EPMs. This suggests that
the rule should be revised in light of its objective. A possible solution to this problem is to
change the compensation scheme. Another option is to change the mechanics of trading halts,
which do not work as intended during drift burst EPMs, since the latt er never triggered a pause
in trading during our sample and is thus not associated with “excess v olatility.”
33

References
Anand, A. & Venkataraman, K. (2016), ‘Market conditions, fragilit y, and the economics of
market making’, Journal of Financial Economics 121(2), 327–349.
Autorit´ e des March´ es Financiers (2017), ‘Study of the behaviou r
of high-frequency traders on Euronext Paris’. Available at
https://www.amf-france.org/en/news-publications/publications/reports-research-and-analysi 
Barclay, M. J. & Warner, J. B. (1993), ‘Stealth trading and volatility : Which trades move
prices?’, Journal of Financial Economics 34(3), 281–305.
Bellia, M., Pelizzon, L., Subrahmanyam, M. G. & Yuferova, D. (2025), ‘Market liquidity and
competition among designated market makers’, Management Science 71(1), 184–201.
Benos, E. & Sagade, S. (2012), ‘High-frequency trading behaviou r and its impact on market
quality: Evidence from the UK equity market’. Working paper.
Bessembinder, H., Hao, J. & Zheng, K. (2020), ‘Liquidity provision co ntracts and market quality:
Evidence from the New York Stock Exchange’, Review of Financial Studies 33(1), 44–74.
Brogaard, J. A. (2010), ‘High frequency trading and its impact on m arket quality’. Working
paper.
Brogaard, J. A., Carrion, A., Moyaert, T., Riordan, R., Shkilko, A. & S okolov, K. (2018),
‘High frequency trading and extreme price movements’, Journal of Financial Economics
128(2), 253–265.
34

Brunnermeier, M. K. & Pedersen, L. H. (2005), ‘Predatory tradin g’, Journal of Finance
60(4), 1825–1863.
Budish, E., Cramton, P. & Smith, J. (2015), ‘The high-frequency tr ading arms race: Frequent
batch auctions as a market design response’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(4), 1547–
1621.
Cespa, G. & Foucault, T. (2014), ‘Illiquidity contagion and liquidity cra shes’, Review of Financial
Studies 27(6), 1615–1660.
Cespa, G. & Vives, X. (2025), ‘Market opacity and fragility: Why liquid ity evaporates when it
is most needed’. Working paper.
Chaboud, A. P., Chiquoine, B., Hjalmarsson, E. & Vega, C. (2014), ‘R ise of the machines:
Algorithmic trading in the foreign exchange market’, Journal of Finance 69(5), 2045–2084.
Christensen, K., Oomen, R. C. A. & Ren` o, R. (2022), ‘The drift bur st hypothesis’, Journal of
Econometrics 227(2), 461–497.
Clark-Joseph, A. D., Ye, M. & Zi, C. (2017), ‘Designated market mak ers still matter: Evidence
from two natural experiments’, Journal of Financial Economics 126(3), 652–667.
ESMA (2021), ‘MiFID II review report on Algorithmic Trading’. Available at
https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/esma70-156-4572_mifid_ii_final_repor 
Euronext (2025), ‘Euronext Rule Book – Book I: Harmonised Rules’. The latest version is
available at https://www.euronext.com/en/regulation/euronext-regulated-market .
35

Gao, C. & Mizrach, B. (2016), ‘Market quality breakdowns in equities ’, Journal of Financial
Markets 28(1), 1–23.
Glosten, L. R. (1987), ‘Components of the bid-ask spread and the statistical properties of trans-
action prices’, Journal of Finance 42(5), 1293–1307.
Goldstein, M. A. & Kavajecz, K. A. (2004), ‘Trading strategies dur ing circuit breakers and
extreme market movements’, Journal of Financial Markets 7(3), 301–333.
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M. & Menkveld, A. J. (2011), ‘Does algo rithmic trading improve
liquidity?’, Journal of Finance 66(1), 1–33.
Huang, J. & Wang, J. (2009), ‘Liquidity and market crashes’, Review of Financial Studies
22(7), 2607–2643.
Jacod, J., Li, Y., Mykland, P. A., Podolskij, M. & Vetter, M. (2009), ‘M icrostructure noise in
the continuous case: The pre-averaging approach’, Stochastic Processes and their Applications
119(7), 2249–2276.
Jones, C. M. (2013), ‘What do we know about high-frequency trad ing?’. Working paper.
Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A. S., Samadi, M. & Tuzun, T. (2017), ‘The Flash Cra sh: High frequency
trading in an electronic market’, Journal of Finance 72(3), 967–998.
Korajczyk, R. A. & Murphy, D. (2019), ‘High-frequency market m aking to large institutional
trades’, Review of Financial Studies 32(3), 1034–1067.
36

Lee, S. S. & Mykland, P. A. (2008), ‘Jumps in ﬁnancial markets: A ne w nonparametric test and
jump dynamics’, Review of Financial Studies 21(6), 2535–2563.
Menkveld, A. J. (2014), ‘High-frequency traders and market str ucture’, Financial Review
49(2), 333–344.
NYSE-Euronext (2012), ‘Euronext Cash Market, Info Flash of 26 January 2012’. Available at
https://euronext.com/.
NYSE-Euronext (2013), ‘Euronext Cash Market, Info Flash of 9 M ay 2013’. Available at
https://euronext.com/.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2014), ‘Equity market str uc-
ture literature review – Part II: High frequency trading’. Report
by the staﬀ of the Division of Trading and Markets, available at
https://www.sec.gov/marketstructure/research/hft_lit_review_march_2014.pdf.
van Kervel, V. & Menkveld, A. J. (2019), ‘High-frequency trading a round large institutional
orders’, Journal of Finance 74(3), 1091–1137.
Yang, L. & Zhu, H. (2020), ‘Back-running: Seeking and hiding funda mental information in order
ﬂows’, Review of Financial Studies 33(4), 1484–1533.
37

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of drift burst EPM
Quantile
Mean Std. Min Max q0.10 Median q0.90
Return -1.35 0.80 -5.18 -0.37 -2.42 -1.11 -0.62
Duration 9.53 8.45 0.07 41.60 2.12 7.32 19.34
in % 1.87 1.66 0.01 8.16 0.42 1.44 3.81
Number of trades 582.10 442.32 89.00 2612.00 182.90 452.50 1191.70
in % 5.99 4.29 1.07 35.98 2.46 5.01 9.66
Trading volume 4598.60 3789.11 537.53 18268.03 1210.75 3521.45 9530 .02
in % 5.43 4.06 0.71 34.71 2.02 4.50 9.03
Signed volume -1276.37 1347.86 -9291.14 1722.17 -2942.18 -1049.13 - 19.78
in % 21.07 182.75 -667.12 1592.26 -58.15 9.19 64.44
Note. This table shows descriptive statistics of a drift burst EPM. We calcu late the return (in
percent), the duration, the number of trades, the euro trading volume (in thousands), and the
signed volume for each event. We report for each statistic its samp le average, standard deviation,
minimum value, maximum value, and the 10%, 50% (median), and 90% qua ntile across events.
The rows starting with “in %” measure the statistic in percent relativ e to the associated number
computed over the whole trading day.
38

Table 2: Coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR for trading imbalance
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN IB-CLIENT NON-HFT
Pre-event -0.007 0.031** -0.012 -0.019 0.014
(-0.79) (2.47) (-1.08) (-1.46) (1.22)
Early drop 0.078* 0.290*** -0.145** -0.020 -0.045
(1.69) (4.09) (-2.28) (-0.50) (-0.98)
Intermediate drop -0.025 0.176*** -0.056 -0.084** -0.029
(-0.74) (3.83) (-1.50) (-2.02) (-0.79)
Late drop 0.017 0.228*** -0.007 -0.266*** -0.012
(0.30) (3.38) (-0.10) (-3.47) (-0.20)
Recovery -0.024** -0.009 -0.018 -0.016 0.041**
(-2.46) (-0.62) (-0.89) (-0.90) (2.39)
Bid-ask spread 0.002 0.006 -0.008 0.001 -0.002
(0.50) (1.20) (-1.45) (0.15) (-0.33)
Log(euro volume) -0.018** 0.025** 0.008 -0.026* 0.011
(-2.22) (2.33) (0.63) (-1.83) (0.73)
Return 0.021* -0.189*** 0.012 0.031*** 0.016*
(1.78) (-12.06) (1.23) (3.68) (1.83)
¯R2 0.003 0.057 0.025 0.039 0.020
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN IB-CLIENT NON-HFT
Pre-event 0.015 -0.010 -0.024 0.018 0.017
(0.80) (-0.39) (-1.27) (1.02) (0.93)
Early drop -0.053 0.013 -0.155** 0.048 0.177**
(-0.97) (0.15) (-2.14) (0.55) (2.71)
Intermediate drop -0.132** -0.162 -0.350*** 0.135 0.472***
(-2.26) (-1.27) (-3.51) (1.07) (2.89)
Late drop -0.089 -0.373** -0.086 -0.000 0.543***
(-1.27) (-2.29) (-0.95) (-0.00) (4.09)
Recovery 0.011 -0.042 0.028 -0.015 0.013
(0.47) (-1.40) (1.44) (-0.59) (0.85)
Bid-ask spread 0.006 -0.007 -0.004 0.003 0.003
(0.65) (-0.71) (-0.57) (0.27) (0.48)

-1.27) (-2.29) (-0.95) (-0.00) (4.09)
Recovery 0.011 -0.042 0.028 -0.015 0.013
(0.47) (-1.40) (1.44) (-0.59) (0.85)
Bid-ask spread 0.006 -0.007 -0.004 0.003 0.003
(0.65) (-0.71) (-0.57) (0.27) (0.48)
Log(euro volume) -0.023 -0.143*** -0.022 0.047** 0.102***
(-1.29) (-7.61) (-1.14) (2.33) (4.54)
Return 0.031 -0.076*** 0.006 0.031** -0.034***
(1.09) (-3.64) (0.61) (2.15) (-3.26)
¯R2 0.008 0.070 0.022 0.031 0.039
Note. We present the results of the V AR in equation ( 9). The model is estimated separately
for unsystematic drift burst EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel B. The dependent
variable is the 10-second trading imbalance of the trader category indicated by the column label.
The explanatory variables “Pre-event”, “Early drop”, “Interme diate drop”, “Late drop”, and
“Recovery” refer to phase dummies of a drift burst EPM. “Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread
(in percent), “Log(euro volume)” is the log-euro volume, and “Ret urn” is the contemporaneous
stock return. We also include stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The non-dummy v ariables are standardized
at the stock level. The coeﬃcient estimates of lagged trading imbalan ces are not reported for
brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard errors
clustered at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs
= 342,032 in Panel A and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
39

Table 3: Coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR for aggressive and pass ive trading imbalance
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
Aggressive Passive
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN
Pre-event -0.006 0.003 -0.018* -0.006 0.033*** 0.004
(-0.74) (0.32) (-1.95) (-0.64) (2.67) (0.50)
Early drop 0.021 -0.037 -0.167*** 0.098** 0.346*** 0.018
(0.54) (-1.11) (-2.91) (2.53) (4.74) (0.55)
Intermediate drop 0.011 0.037 -0.058* -0.058* 0.187*** 0.015
(0.29) (1.12) (-1.67) (-1.93) (3.92) (0.44)
Late drop 0.055 0.013 -0.065 -0.063 0.238*** 0.094
(0.99) (0.26) (-0.90) (-1.23) (3.85) (1.61)
Recovery -0.016 -0.011 -0.036** -0.021** -0.005 0.014
(-1.46) (-0.78) (-2.44) (-2.60) (-0.32) (0.62)
Bid-ask spread 0.001 0.006 -0.006 0.001 0.003 -0.004
(0.16) (1.25) (-1.03) (0.11) (0.58) (-0.49)
Log(euro volume) -0.020*** -0.013 -0.015* -0.002 0.036*** 0.024**
(-2.85) (-1.48) (-1.69) (-0.28) (3.97) (2.13)
Return 0.239*** 0.142*** 0.199*** -0.300*** -0.312*** -0.208***
(22.13) (12.89) (22.29) (-29.38) (-22.60) (-23.90)
¯R2 0.054 0.029 0.050 0.082 0.106 0.058
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
Aggressive Passive
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-HFT OWN
Pre-event 0.047** 0.040* 0.022 -0.033** -0.051 -0.055**
(2.35) (1.89) (1.45) (-2.21) (-1.67) (-2.18)
Early drop -0.083* 0.074 -0.188** 0.017 -0.053 0.000
(-1.86) (0.77) (-2.07) (0.39) (-1.12) (0.00)
Intermediate drop -0.064 -0.050 -0.355*** -0.101** -0.145 -0.036

1.89) (1.45) (-2.21) (-1.67) (-2.18)
Early drop -0.083* 0.074 -0.188** 0.017 -0.053 0.000
(-1.86) (0.77) (-2.07) (0.39) (-1.12) (0.00)
Intermediate drop -0.064 -0.050 -0.355*** -0.101** -0.145 -0.036
(-1.27) (-0.41) (-3.74) (-2.10) (-1.64) (-0.79)
Late drop 0.180** -0.309** -0.074 -0.315*** -0.284** -0.017
(2.68) (-2.18) (-1.01) (-4.05) (-2.20) (-0.22)
Recovery 0.010 -0.078*** -0.031** 0.001 -0.003 0.081***
(0.36) (-2.93) (-2.37) (0.13) (-0.14) (2.92)
Bid-ask spread 0.018** 0.010 0.011 -0.012 -0.015 -0.020***
(2.14) (1.08) (1.69) (-1.34) (-1.47) (-3.58)
Log(euro volume) -0.010 -0.108*** -0.064*** -0.018 -0.089*** 0.04 8**
(-0.74) (-6.12) (-3.15) (-1.66) (-6.45) (2.71)
Return 0.248*** 0.178*** 0.117*** -0.266*** -0.227*** -0.135***
(10.28) (10.69) (11.41) (-14.22) (-10.37) (-12.29)
¯R2 0.087 0.085 0.041 0.095 0.091 0.056
Note. We present the results of the V AR in equation ( 9). The model is estimated separately
for unsystematic drift burst EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel B. The dependent
variable is the 10-second trading imbalance, split into aggressive and passive orders, of the trader
category indicated by the column label. The explanatory variables “P re-event”, “Early drop”,
“Intermediate drop”, “Late drop”, and “Recovery” refer to ph ase dummies of a drift burst EPM.
“Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread (in percent), “Log(euro v olume)” is the log-euro volume,
and “Return” is the contemporaneous stock return. We also includ e stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The

ft burst EPM.
“Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread (in percent), “Log(euro v olume)” is the log-euro volume,
and “Return” is the contemporaneous stock return. We also includ e stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The
non-dummy variables are standardized at the stock level. The coeﬃ cient estimates of lagged
trading imbalances are not reported for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the s tock and date level. * P -value<0.1;
**P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs = 342,032 in Panel A and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
40

Table 4: Cross-sectional analysis of DMMs trading imbalance
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM
Intercept −0.17 −0.24
(−0.33) ( −0.61)
T I i
Intermediate+Early 0.49 0 .35∗
(1.56) (1 .86)
T I IB-HFT OWN
Intermediate+Early −0.04 −0.06∗
(−0.79) ( −1.83)
T I IB-CLIENT
Intermediate+Early 0.09 −0.08
(1.44) ( −1.52)
Log(euro volume) 0 .01 0 .01
(0.24) (0 .78)
Bid-ask spread 0 .74 2 .65∗
(0.54) (1 .72)
Return −0.06 0 .07∗∗
(−1.55) (2 .12)
¯R2 0.134 0 .197
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM
Intercept 0 .95 4 .27∗∗∗
(0.80) (2 .76)
T I i
Intermediate+Early 0.75∗∗∗ −0.64∗∗
(2.67) ( −2.04)
T I IB-HFT OWN
Intermediate+Early −0.23∗ 0.20∗∗
(−1.87) (2 .12)
T I IB-CLIENT
Intermediate+Early −0.25∗∗∗ 0.25∗∗
(−2.59) (2 .13)
Log(euro volume) −0.05 −0.22∗∗∗
(−1.00) ( −3.13)
Bid-ask spread 1 .75 −0.47
(0.82) ( −0.14)
Return −0.13 −0.27
(−0.84) ( −1.41)
¯R2 0.539 0 .384
Note. This table presents coeﬃcient estimates of the cross-sectional r egression in equation
(11) over unsystematic drift burst EPMs in Panel A and systematic one s in Panel B. The
dependent variable is the trading imbalance of the DMM in the late stag e of the event, T I i
Late
(where either i = PURE-HFT MM or IB-HFT MM). The explanatory variables are calcula ted
over the combined early and intermediate stage and include the lagge d value of the DMMs
trading imbalance, T I i
Intermediate+Early, the trading imbalance of IB-HFT OWN and IB-CLIENT,
T I IB-HFT OWN

over the combined early and intermediate stage and include the lagge d value of the DMMs
trading imbalance, T I i
Intermediate+Early, the trading imbalance of IB-HFT OWN and IB-CLIENT,
T I IB-HFT OWN
Intermediate+Early and T I IB-CLIENT
Intermediate+Early, the log-euro volume, the average bid-ask spread, and
the return. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard
errors. ¯R2 is the adjusted coeﬃcient of determination. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -
value<0.01. nObs = 121 in Panel A and nObs = 27 in Panel B.
41

Table 5: Monetary proﬁt during a drift burst EPM
Systematic Unsystematic
PURE CLIENT 24 .36 11 .07
(25.94) (124 .21)
PURE-HFT MM −377.78 −164.09
(541.03) (444 .22)
PURE-HFT OWN −60.17 −27.52
(108.69) (312 .32)
IB-CLIENT −1024.37 241 .62
(889.47) (774 .40)
IB-HFT MM −75.61 −2799.72∗∗∗
(959.95) (706 .58)
IB-HFT OWN 5396 .13∗∗ 2239.13∗
(2713.46) (1204 .43)
IB-HFT PARENT −208.34 −423.07∗
(484.79) (238 .88)
NON-HFT CLIENT −3164.53 −438.11
(2250.18) (996 .79)
NON-HFT OWN −765.22 1375 .07∗∗
(1457.17) (690 .90)
Note. This table presents the average monetary proﬁt (in euros) during downward drift burst
EPMs, divided into systematic and unsystematic events. Standard errors of the average are in
parentheses.
42

Table 6: Proﬁt and loss of trading activity
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-CLIENT IB-HFT OWN NON-HFT
Dummy 0.124 -0.349*** 0.432*** 0.895** 0.388*
(0.97) (-2.96) (2.96) (2.54) (1.79)
Bid-ask spread 0.488** 0.007 0.236 0.730 -0.097
(2.59) (0.07) (1.21) (1.10) (-0.43)
Log(euro volume) 0.580*** -0.072 0.131 0.360** -0.502***
(5.84) (-1.21) (1.29) (2.39) (-3.33)
Return 0.064 -0.098 -0.988* -0.428 -0.310
(0.22) (-0.41) (-1.89) (-0.67) (-0.66)
¯R2 0.012 0.013 0.028 0.012 0.011
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT MM IB-HFT MM IB-CLIENT IB-HFT OWN NON-HFT
Dummy 0.929** 0.739** -0.387 1.517*** -1.351*
(2.08) (2.22) (-1.63) (2.93) (-2.00)
Bid-ask spread 0.315** -0.028 0.519*** 0.760*** -0.482*
(2.22) (-0.16) (3.01) (2.94) (-1.91)
Log(euro volume) 1.047*** 0.047 0.083 -0.056 -1.198***
(3.58) (0.38) (0.61) (-0.26) (-4.13)
Return -0.066 -2.056*** 0.102 -0.829 1.782***
(-0.19) (-6.97) (0.43) (-1.62) (4.42)
¯R2 0.019 0.086 0.006 0.015 0.023
Note. This table presents coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR in equation ( 12). The model is
estimated separately for unsystematic drift burst EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel
B. The dependent variable is the 10-second proﬁt and loss (P&L) of the trader category indicated
by the column label. “Dummy” equals one for the entire duration of th e drift burst EPM (from
the beginning of the pre-event until the end of the recovery), ze ro otherwise, “Bid-ask spread” is

cated
by the column label. “Dummy” equals one for the entire duration of th e drift burst EPM (from
the beginning of the pre-event until the end of the recovery), ze ro otherwise, “Bid-ask spread” is
the quoted spread (in percent), “Log(euro volume)” is the log-eu ro volume, and “Return” is the
contemporaneous stock return. We also include stock ﬁxed eﬀect s. The non-dummy variables
are standardized at the stock level. The coeﬃcient estimates of th e lagged P&L are not reported
for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard
errors clustered at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01.
nObs = 342,032 in Panel A and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
43

Figure 1: Trading activity by trader category
Note. This ﬁgure displays the percentage of total double-counted volum e (buy and sell) for each
trader group, averaged across stocks in our sample. The catego ry is determined via the account
ﬂag from the exchange and the AMF ﬂag for HFT.
44

Figure 2: The price of Technip on June 25, 2013
Note. In the upper panel, the ﬁgure reports the transaction price of Te chnip on June 25,
2013. The price is sampled at a 10-second grid. The middle panel repo rts the test statistic
of Christensen et al. (2022), which detects a drift burst (DB) EPM around noon (as indicated
by the shaded area around that time). The lower panel shows the a pproach of Brogaard et al.
(2018). The authors examine the absolute value of 10-second returns a nd detects a volatility-
based (VB) EPM around 10:30 (as indicated by the shaded area arou nd that time). The dashed
lines represent 99.9% conﬁdence bands.
45

Figure 3: Temporal distribution of drift burst EPMs
09:00 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 17:00 18:00
2013
2014
TEC ALOCA TEC+GLE SGO VK CAPLR
ML VIV ALOLG+ACA BN BNP
SAN
ORA RNO AIRACA ORAACGLE CAP ML STMGLE SAFCAP ALO+AIRSAF
AIRAI+BNP EDFCAP PUBENGIALO+SAF+SU+VK+RNO+DG+AI+VIV+ML+FP+CS+CA+SAN+ENGI ACRI VIV VIV
SU AIRALO
CAPCA FP
CA KER
ALO VIVALOGLE+SGO
LG
EDF
PUBALO TEC AC AIR
SANLG VIESAN+LG+SGO+EI RI EI RNOSGO+LG+AIR+AI+SU+DG+BNP+GLE+KER+MC+SAN+CS+FPVIEMC CAPVKBN VKENGI MLKER RI
ML EI ALO RIALO LG CA
CA STMSAF CSCS+SGO DGVIE TEC CS+GLERI GLE
TECSTMORA+VIVCAP AC EIACTEC+ORARNO PUB
ACVK ACA RNOORA
Note. In this ﬁgure, we present the timing of the 148 drift burst EPMs ana lyzed in the empirical
application. On the x-axis, we plot the start of the event (or tstart) with a cross and the time of
the trough (or ttrough) with a circle connected by a line segment to mark the duration. On th e
y-axis, we report the time of the year it occurred. The ticker symb ols of the aﬀected stocks are
shown above the line (see Table B.2 for the company name). A “+” indicates drift burst EPMs
that overlap.
46

Figure 4: Average cumulative return during a drift burst EPM
Start Trough
Stage
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Cumulative return (in %)
PRE-EVENT
EARLY
INTERMEDIATE
LATE
RECOVERY
Average drift burst EPM
Unsystematic
Systematic
10%-90% quantile-band
Note. This ﬁgure shows the evolution of the cumulative return over an ave rage drift burst EPM,
and also an unsystematic and systematic one, together with a 10%- 90% quantile-band calculated
across the combined 148 events. The vertical lines separate the d uration of the drift burst EPM
from start to through into an early, intermediate, and late stage, as detailed in the main text.
47

Figure 5: Price impact of a drift burst EPM
Panel A: PPI vs. TPI. Panel B: DPI vs. duration.
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1
Permanent Price Impact (PPI, in %)
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Transient Price Impact (TPI, in %)
Average PPI:
Unsystematic = -1.08%
Systematic = -1.33%
Average TPI:
Unsystematic = -0.33%
Systematic = -0.78%
Unsystematic
Systematic
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Duration ( , in minutes)
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Downward Price Impact (DPI, in %)
Correlation: -0.552
Unsystematic
Systematic
Note. In Panel A, we report a scatter plot of the permanent price impact (PPI, deﬁned in
equation ( 5)) versus the transient price impact (TPI, deﬁned in equation ( 7)). We also compute
the associated sample average and standard deviation (in parenth eses) of the log-return, which
is further divided into unsystematic and systematic drift burst EPM s. In Panel B, we show a
scatter plot of the downward price impact (DPI, deﬁned in equation (6)) versus the duration of
the drift burst EPM. The negative correlation implies that the longer a drift burst EPM lasts
the deeper is the associated price drop.
48

Figure 6: Dynamic evolution of trading imbalance
Panel A: Unsystematic Panel B: Systematic
0 10 20 30 40 50
Average time (in minutes)
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
IB-HFT OWN
IB-HFT MM
PURE-HFT MM
IB CLIENT
NON-HFT
0 10 20 30 40 50
Average time (in minutes)
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
IB-HFT OWN
IB-HFT MM
PURE-HFT MM
IB CLIENT
NON-HFT
Note. The ﬁgure reports the trading imbalance of IB-HFT OWN, IB-HFT MM , PURE-HFT
MM, IB-CLIENT, and NON-HFT (the sum of NON-HFT CLIENT and NON -HFT OWN)
during a drift burst EPM. We average over the 121 unsystematic ev ents in Panel A, while Panel
B holds the results for the 27 systematic events. In the backgrou nd of each ﬁgure, we showcase
the average cumulative return dynamic from Figure 4 as a visual landmark.
49

Figure 7: Changes in trading imbalance for a systematic drift burst E PM
Panel A: IB-HFT OWN Panel B: IB-HFT MM Panel C: PURE-HFT MM
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
EARLY
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
EARLY
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
EARLY
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
LATE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
LATE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
LATE
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
RECOVERY
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
RECOVERY
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20Count
RECOVERY
Note. The ﬁgure depicts a histogram of the empirical distribution of one-m inute changes in
trading imbalance for IB-HFT OWN (Panel A), IB-HFT MM (Panel B), and PURE-HFT MM
(Panel C) at diﬀerent stages of a systematic drift burst EPM. A ne gative number means that
the trader category is collectively selling either via aggressive or pas sive trades, and vice versa.
50

Figure 8: The distribution of selling pressure
-15 -10 -5 0 5
Selling Pressure
0
0.5
1
Kernel density estimate
Unconditional
Drift burst EPM
Note. We show the unconditional distribution for the measure of selling pre ssure, SP (day,stock)
m ,
pooled over each day, stock, and one-minute interval in our sample . We also plot the distribution
of selling pressure during a drift burst EPM.
51

Figure 9: Change in trading imbalance during extreme selling pressure
Panel A: None Panel B: Unsystematic Panel C: Systematic
Note. We plot the distribution of the change in trading imbalances of IB-HFT MM, PURE-HFT
MM, and NON-HFT during extreme selling pressure. We extract the 0 .1% of time points with
the most selling pressure from the unconditional distribution of the SP (day,stock)
m measure deﬁned
in ( 13). We split these observations into three mutually exclusive sets, de pending on whether
they are associated with no drift burst EPM (Panel A), an unsyste matic one (Panel B), or a
systematic one (Panel C).
52

Appendices
A A comparison with volatility-based EPMs
Brogaard et al. (2018) identify EPMs from a sample of returns calculated over 10-second inter-
vals. First, they extract the subset of such returns belonging to the 99.9th percentile of the
10-second absolute return distribution. Second, the calculation is repeated on residuals from a
return autoregression that controls for ten lagged 10-second r eturns, to capture serial correlation
induced by microstructure noise, and also incorporates the ten lag ged returns for the market
index, to correct for systematic risk. Loosely speaking, these te chniques are designed to extract
high-volatility returns. Third, they employ the jump test statistic o f Lee & Mykland (2008).
In this appendix, we implement these approaches and compare the o utcome with the drift
burst EPMs. We denote the ﬁrst and second approach as “return EPMs” and “residual EPMs.”
We exclude the jump test, because—by construction—the drift bu rst statistic is resistant to the
price jump component.
In Table A.1, we compare the negative half of identiﬁed return- and residual-ba sed EPMs
with the downward drift burst EPMs. On average, for each stock, both volatility- and drift
burst-based detection label 0.05% of the 10-second intervals as E PMs, which is a mechanical
eﬀect of the conﬁdence level. However, there is only a modest over lap between the identiﬁed
EPMs. The return EPMs intersect with 26.35% of drift burst EPMs, w hile the residual EPMs

is a mechanical
eﬀect of the conﬁdence level. However, there is only a modest over lap between the identiﬁed
EPMs. The return EPMs intersect with 26.35% of drift burst EPMs, w hile the residual EPMs
detect a lesser 18.92%. We conclude that the overlap, while not neglig ible, is nevertheless limited.
Hence, our sample of drift burst EPMs is to a large extent diﬀerent f rom Brogaard et al. (2018).
Figure A.1 replicates Figure 4 by showing the price evolution in a one-hour interval centered
i

Table A.1: Comparison of volatility- and drift burst-based EPMs
EPMs per stock Overlap to drift burst EPMs
Absolute (#) Fraction (%) Absolute (#) Fraction (%)
Return EPMs 286.48 0.05 39 26.35
Residual EPMs 282.19 0.05 28 18.92
Note. The table reports the average number of EPMs detected for a sing le stock in absolute
value and as a fraction (in per cent) of the total number of 10-sec ond returns in our sample,
which is composed of 37 stocks traded on NYSE Euronext Paris that belong to the CAC 40
Index for the year 2013. It also shows the number of drift burst E PMs that are also detected by
the return- and residual-based EPM calculation of Brogaard et al. (2018).
around the identiﬁed negative return EPMs. To get a better impres sion of the dynamic, we
restrict attention to isolated observations that are not surroun ded by any other return EPMs
inside the window. As a comparison, we show the return dynamic for a n average drift burst EPM.
Evidently, return EPMs tend to extract volatility-based returns t hat—while being sampled from
the left tail of the 10-second return distribution—do not otherwis e lead to persistent changes
in the fundamental value of the stock before or after the initial de cline. By contrast, Figure
A.1 strongly supports the conjecture that drift burst EPMs are a diﬀ erent sample that allows
to extract a sequence of consecutive returns around which the m arket was highly directional.
ii

Figure A.1: Average cumulative return during volatility- and drift bur st-based EPM
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Average time (in minutes)
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Cumulative return (in %)
return EPM
10%-90% quantile-band
drift burst EPM
Note. This ﬁgure reports the average price evolution in a one-hour window centered around a
volatility-based EPM. We follow Brogaard et al. (2018) and label each 10-second return at or
above the 99.9th percentile of distribution of absolute 10-second r eturns as an EPM. The ﬁgure
is based on the negative half of that sample. We superimpose a 10%-9 0% quantile-band for
each 10-second interval over the interval. As a comparison, we als o show the average cumulative
return of a drift burst-based EPM, separately for unsystematic and systematic events.
iii

B Supplementary material
This appendix presents information about the sample of drift burst EPMs. Moreover, it contains
supplemental material relative to the exposition in the main text.
• Table
B.1 shows a detailed list of the individual drift burst EPMs in our sample, wh ile in
Table B.2 these EPMs are grouped by stock.
• Table B.3 shows estimates of the V AR model in equation ( 9) and is the expanded version
of Table 2 that includes all trader groups.
• In Table B.4 – B.5, we break the dependent variable from equation ( 9) into aggressive and
passive trading imbalances. Otherwise, the estimated equation and the table formatting
are identical to Table B.3.
• In Figure B.1, we show the time series of transaction prices for each stock durin g the
systematic drift burst EPMs detected on April 17, 2013 and Septe mber 3, 2013.
• Figure B.2 replicates Figure 7 on trading imbalances for unsystematic drift burst EPMs.
The full versions of the tables that present coeﬃcient estimates f rom the entire list of covari-
ates included in the V AR model are rather long and are available upon r equest.
iv

Table B.1: The sample of drift burst EPMs – Individual level
Date ISIN Name Begin Trough Duration Date ISIN Company Begin Trough Duration
01/04 FR0000131708 Technip 10:19:27 10:29:29 10:01 07/23 F R0010220475 Alstom 11:18:39 11:22:57 04:18
01/08 FR0010220475 Alstom 14:47:54 15:03:40 15:46 07/25 FR 0000131708 Technip 11:52:35 12:05:16 12:41
01/09 FR0000120172 Carrefour 10:07:42 10:25:18 17:36 07/3 1 FR0000120404 Accor 13:59:14 14:03:35 04:21
01/11 FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 10:53:06 10:57:3 5 04:30 07/31 NL0000235190 EADS 16:54:15 17:01:15 07:00
01/11 FR0000131708 Technip 10:39:28 10:54:05 14:37 08/16 F R0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 15:30:00 15:35:45 05:45
01/14 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 16:45:52 16:52:20 06:28 08/ 20 FR0000120537 Lafarge 9:54:11 10:07:20 13:09
01/14 FR0000125007 Saint-Gobain 15:21:35 15:27:45 06:10 0 8/23 FR0000124141 Veolia Environnement 14:48:18 14:48:39 00:21
01/14 FR0000120354 Vallourec 15:48:07 15:52:15 04:08 08/2 7 FR0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 9:39:30 9:51:30 12:00
01/15 FR0010307819 Legrand 12:04:25 12:08:24 03:58 08/27 F R0000125007 Saint-Gobain 9:44:07 9:51:35 07:28
01/22 FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal 13:46:51 13:50:10 03 :19 08/27 FR0000120537 Lafarge 9:44:47 9:51:56 07:09
01/22 FR0000121261 Michelin 9:54:07 10:06:05 11:58 08/27 F R0000121667 Essilor International 9:44:59 9:51:29 06:30
01/23 FR0010220475 Alstom 15:59:27 15:59:30 00:04 08/29 FR 0000120693 Pernod Ricard 12:25:04 12:59:15 34:12

elin 9:54:07 10:06:05 11:58 08/27 F R0000121667 Essilor International 9:44:59 9:51:29 06:30
01/23 FR0010220475 Alstom 15:59:27 15:59:30 00:04 08/29 FR 0000120693 Pernod Ricard 12:25:04 12:59:15 34:12
01/29 FR0000120537 Lafarge 9:52:51 10:05:06 12:15 08/29 FR 0000121667 Essilor International 15:01:36 15:04:20 02:44
01/29 FR0000045072 Credit Agricole 10:02:42 10:15:25 12:4 3 09/02 FR0000131906 Renault 16:44:04 16:44:31 00:26
01/31 FR0000120644 Danone 11:54:52 12:12:21 17:28 09/03 FR 0000121485 Kering 10:52:46 10:54:56 02:10
02/04 FR0000131104 BNP 14:08:05 14:15:11 07:06 09/03 FR000 0121014 Lvmh Moet 10:52:45 10:54:54 02:09
02/11 FR0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 15:31:45 15:36:10 04 :25 09/03 FR0000131104 BNP 10:53:21 10:55:15 01:55
02/20 FR0000133308 Orange 9:32:28 9:49:00 16:33 09/03 FR00 00130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 10:53:18 10:55:10 01:52
02/22 FR0000131906 Renault 14:59:51 15:15:05 15:14 09/03 F R0000120628 Axa 10:53:09 10:55:10 02:01
02/26 NL0000235190 EADS 16:29:03 16:38:35 09:32 09/03 FR00 00125486 Vinci 10:52:56 10:55:14 02:18
03/01 FR0000045072 Credit Agricole 13:17:21 13:20:15 02:5 4 09/03 FR0000120073 Air Liquide 10:51:15 10:54:55 03:40
03/06 FR0000133308 Orange 15:22:29 15:24:25 01:56 09/03 FR 0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 10:52:54 10:54:55 02:01
03/06 FR0000120404 Accor 15:23:22 15:34:03 10:41 09/03 FR0 000120271 Total 10:53:00 10:54:55 01:55

133308 Orange 15:22:29 15:24:25 01:56 09/03 FR 0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 10:52:54 10:54:55 02:01
03/06 FR0000120404 Accor 15:23:22 15:34:03 10:41 09/03 FR0 000120271 Total 10:53:00 10:54:55 01:55
03/07 FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 10:42:26 10:49:4 5 07:19 09/03 FR0000125007 Saint-Gobain 10:51:03 10:55:04 04:01
03/08 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 13:59:34 14:10:35 11:01 09/ 03 NL0000235190 EADS 10:52:56 10:54:55 01:59
03/12 NL0000226223 STMicroelectronics 17:18:25 17:24:55 06:30 09/03 FR0000120537 Lafarge 10:52:40 10:54:59 02:19
03/12 FR0000121261 Michelin 16:22:32 16:28:04 05:33 09/03 FR0000121972 Schneider 10:52:38 10:55:07 02:29
03/15 FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 11:51:19 11:55:1 0 03:52 09/06 FR0000121014 Lvmh Moet 15:39:26 15:47:35 08:0 9
03/20 FR0000073272 Safran 15:17:00 15:45:28 28:28 09/06 FR 0000124141 Veolia Environnement 15:24:16 15:43:00 18:44
03/21 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 15:15:37 15:33:26 17:49 09/ 09 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 16:45:34 17:12:40 27:07
03/25 FR0010220475 Alstom 16:00:55 16:20:45 19:49 09/10 FR 0000120354 Vallourec 14:47:32 14:50:04 02:32
03/25 NL0000235190 EADS 16:14:00 16:23:06 09:05 09/16 FR00 00120644 Danone 11:23:54 11:30:20 06:26
03/26 FR0000073272 Safran 12:50:52 13:06:22 15:30 09/17 FR 0000120354 Vallourec 16:37:51 16:40:15 02:24
04/04 NL0000235190 EADS 16:19:32 16:29:26 09:54 09/20 FR00 10208488 ENGIE 10:37:10 10:40:05 02:55

/26 FR0000073272 Safran 12:50:52 13:06:22 15:30 09/17 FR 0000120354 Vallourec 16:37:51 16:40:15 02:24
04/04 NL0000235190 EADS 16:19:32 16:29:26 09:54 09/20 FR00 10208488 ENGIE 10:37:10 10:40:05 02:55
04/05 FR0000131104 BNP 11:49:35 11:53:15 03:39 09/24 FR000 0121485 Kering 15:37:05 15:44:04 06:58
04/05 FR0010242511 EDF 14:53:00 14:54:55 01:55 09/24 FR000 0121261 Michelin 15:25:05 15:30:00 04:55
04/05 FR0000120073 Air Liquide 11:47:43 11:53:20 05:37 09/ 24 FR0000120693 Pernod Ricard 16:18:15 16:25:20 07:05
04/10 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 13:11:55 13:13:52 01:57 10/ 02 FR0000121261 Michelin 14:34:11 14:45:30 11:19
04/15 FR0000130577 Publicis Groupe SA 14:46:08 14:56:04 09 :56 10/02 FR0000120693 Pernod Ricard 17:21:58 17:25:05 03: 08
v

04/16 FR0010208488 ENGIE 12:36:04 12:47:55 11:51 10/02 FR0 010220475 Alstom 15:39:45 15:43:00 03:15
04/17 FR0000131906 Renault 9:30:08 9:51:45 21:37 10/02 FR0 000121667 Essilor International 15:21:32 15:28:50 07:18
04/17 FR0010220475 Alstom 9:30:01 9:51:26 21:24 10/03 FR00 10220475 Alstom 9:29:40 9:48:00 18:20
04/17 FR0010208488 ENGIE 9:44:54 9:51:34 06:41 10/09 FR000 0120172 Carrefour 14:01:46 14:05:45 04:00
04/17 FR0000073272 Safran 9:29:55 9:51:56 22:00 10/09 FR00 00120537 Lafarge 12:30:21 12:38:28 08:07
04/17 FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal 9:42:54 9:51:24 08:3 0 10/18 FR0000120172 Carrefour 11:23:12 11:34:48 11:35
04/17 FR0000125486 Vinci 9:30:09 9:51:45 21:36 10/23 NL000 0226223 STMicroelectronics 16:16:06 16:24:16 08:10
04/17 FR0000120628 Axa 9:42:50 9:51:45 08:56 10/24 FR00000 73272 Safran 14:29:39 14:42:41 13:02
04/17 FR0000120354 Vallourec 9:30:02 9:51:25 21:23 10/25 F R0000120628 Axa 15:31:14 15:47:16 16:02
04/17 FR0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo 9:42:55 9:51:30 08:3 5 10/28 FR0000120628 Axa 13:00:01 13:11:11 11:11
04/17 FR0000120172 Carrefour 9:42:34 9:51:29 08:55 10/28 F R0000125486 Vinci 17:25:06 17:29:35 04:29
04/17 FR0000120073 Air Liquide 9:41:34 9:51:30 09:56 10/28 FR0000125007 Saint-Gobain 13:02:45 13:15:25 12:39
04/17 FR0000121261 Michelin 9:42:50 9:51:40 08:50 10/29 FR 0000124141 Veolia Environnement 9:29:59 9:40:05 10:06
04/17 FR0000120271 Total 9:30:09 9:51:34 21:26 10/30 FR000 0131708 Technip 12:29:41 12:31:48 02:07

121261 Michelin 9:42:50 9:51:40 08:50 10/29 FR 0000124141 Veolia Environnement 9:29:59 9:40:05 10:06
04/17 FR0000120271 Total 9:30:09 9:51:34 21:26 10/30 FR000 0131708 Technip 12:29:41 12:31:48 02:07
04/17 FR0000121972 Schneider 9:30:00 9:51:29 21:29 11/05 F R0000120693 Pernod Ricard 14:55:14 15:10:07 14:53
04/23 FR0000120404 Accor 16:50:24 17:14:07 23:43 11/05 FR0 000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 14:46:45 14:50:15 03:30
04/26 FR0000120693 Pernod Ricard 10:18:56 10:27:19 08:23 1 1/05 FR0000120628 Axa 14:40:25 14:48:38 08:13
04/29 FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal 13:55:11 14:02:29 07 :19 11/07 FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 16:32:20 16:3 6:35 04:15
04/30 FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal 15:48:25 15:57:40 09 :15 11/20 FR0000131708 Technip 15:37:23 16:09:40 32:17
05/07 NL0000235190 EADS 15:46:36 16:01:39 15:03 11/21 NL00 00226223 STMicroelectronics 13:56:25 13:58:30 02:06
05/07 FR0000121972 Schneider 12:17:56 12:27:00 09:04 11/2 2 FR0000133308 Orange 12:17:19 12:27:59 10:41
05/10 FR0010220475 Alstom 10:01:03 10:12:20 11:17 11/22 FR 0000127771 Vivendi Universal 12:16:49 12:22:49 06:00
05/22 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 15:44:54 15:47:05 02:11 11/ 25 FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini 10:08:52 10:13:24 04:32
05/23 FR0000120172 Carrefour 15:46:17 15:48:51 02:34 11/2 6 FR0000120404 Accor 11:49:31 11:59:05 09:34
05/29 FR0000120271 Total 16:13:10 16:17:20 04:10 11/26 FR0 000121667 Essilor International 16:37:43 16:41:02 03:18

Carrefour 15:46:17 15:48:51 02:34 11/2 6 FR0000120404 Accor 11:49:31 11:59:05 09:34
05/29 FR0000120271 Total 16:13:10 16:17:20 04:10 11/26 FR0 000121667 Essilor International 16:37:43 16:41:02 03:18
06/05 FR0000120172 Carrefour 11:23:47 11:26:35 02:48 11/2 7 FR0000120404 Accor 13:27:19 13:47:55 20:36
06/07 FR0000121485 Kering 12:02:29 12:09:09 06:41 12/03 FR 0000133308 Orange 9:58:45 10:03:55 05:10
06/14 FR0010220475 Alstom 15:01:31 15:02:23 00:52 12/03 FR 0000131906 Renault 10:09:54 10:13:25 03:30
06/14 FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal 15:39:05 15:51:09 12 :05 12/03 FR0000131708 Technip 9:53:52 10:03:48 09:56
06/19 FR0010220475 Alstom 13:08:27 13:10:54 02:27 12/05 FR 0000130577 Publicis Groupe SA 15:31:10 15:43:04 11:55
06/24 FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale 10:15:26 10:33:2 5 17:59 12/17 FR0000120404 Accor 11:05:41 11:16:16 10:35
06/24 FR0000125007 Saint-Gobain 10:15:02 10:33:25 18:23 1 2/18 FR0000120354 Vallourec 9:30:00 9:46:41 16:41
07/01 FR0000120537 Lafarge 16:39:15 16:41:45 02:30 12/19 F R0000045072 Credit Agricole 14:48:57 14:53:20 04:23
07/11 FR0010242511 EDF 11:13:35 11:18:55 05:20 12/19 FR000 0131906 Renault 16:54:09 17:07:10 13:01
07/18 FR0000130577 Publicis Groupe SA 13:51:35 13:51:56 00 :21 12/23 FR0000133308 Orange 10:46:27 11:02:27 16:00
Note. The table reports detailed information about the 148 drift burst EP Ms in our sample. In particular, we report the
date of occurrence, and the name and ISIN code of the aﬀected s tock.

:27 16:00
Note. The table reports detailed information about the 148 drift burst EP Ms in our sample. In particular, we report the
date of occurrence, and the name and ISIN code of the aﬀected s tock. Moreover, we show the time of the beginning and
trough of each event, and its duration (in mm:ss).
vi

Table B.2: The sample of drift burst EPMs – Aggregated by stock
Return (in %) Duration (mm:ss)
ISIN Name Ticker Market Cap Trades Volume # EPMs Mean Median Std. Mean Median Std.
FR0000045072 Credit Agricole ACA 23,221 12,774 88 3 -1.13 -0.89 0.47 0 6:40 04:23 05:17
FR0000073272 Safran SAF 21,064 8,569 60 4 -1.11 -0.98 0.53 19:45 18:4 5 06:56
FR0000120073 Air Liquide AI 32,047 12,821 128 3 -0.99 -0.99 0.30 06:24 0 5:37 03:12
FR0000120172 Carrefour CA 20,858 13,152 116 6 -1.53 -1.57 0.74 07:5 5 06:27 05:58
FR0000120271 Total FP 145,995 26,025 348 3 -1.23 -1.01 0.49 09:10 04 :10 10:40
FR0000120354 Vallourec VK 5,035 9,902 51 5 -1.18 -0.78 0.60 09:26 04:08 08:57
FR0000120404 Accor AC 7,822 7,872 49 6 -1.10 -1.07 0.48 13:15 10:38 07 :21
FR0000120537 Lafarge LG 15,652 11,512 76 6 -1.12 -0.97 0.40 07:35 07 :38 04:37
FR0000120578 Sanoﬁ Synth´ elabo SAN 101,851 27,238 400 5 -0.94 -0 .87 0.57 06:33 05:45 03:52
FR0000120628 Axa CS 48,784 19,042 200 5 -1.24 -1.02 0.71 09:16 08:56 0 5:05
FR0000120644 Danone BN 30,688 14,526 176 2 -1.40 -1.40 0.02 11:57 11 :57 07:49
FR0000120693 Pernod Ricard RI 21,799 10,385 96 5 -0.88 -0.69 0.59 13 :32 08:23 12:18
FR0000121014 Lvmh Moet MC 66,353 13,133 200 2 -1.27 -1.27 0.33 05:09 05:09 04:14
FR0000121261 Michelin ML 14,350 12,618 99 5 -1.50 -1.77 0.72 08:31 08:50 03:13
FR0000121485 Kering KER 19,395 6,899 83 3 -0.89 -0.84 0.29 05:16 06:41 02:42
FR0000121667 Essilor International EI 16,592 10,950 86 4 -0.98 -0.9 3 0.15 04:58 04:54 02:17

-1.77 0.72 08:31 08:50 03:13
FR0000121485 Kering KER 19,395 6,899 83 3 -0.89 -0.84 0.29 05:16 06:41 02:42
FR0000121667 Essilor International EI 16,592 10,950 86 4 -0.98 -0.9 3 0.15 04:58 04:54 02:17
FR0000121972 Schneider SU 35,628 16,767 164 3 -1.79 -1.43 1.15 11:01 09:04 09:39
FR0000124141 Veolia Environnement VIE 6,338 10,989 68 3 -2.46 -2.79 1.21 09:44 10:06 09:12
FR0000125007 Saint-Gobain SGO 22,193 13,639 116 5 -1.36 -1.34 0.33 0 9:44 07:28 05:47
FR0000125338 Cap G´ emini CAP 7,876 9,677 61 7 -0.87 -0.87 0.28 10:09 0 6:28 09:20
FR0000125486 Vinci DG 28,713 14,361 124 3 -1.25 -1.18 0.79 09:28 04:29 10:34
FR0000127771 Vivendi Universal VIV 25,660 13,320 143 6 -1.39 -1.34 0.66 07:45 07:54 02:59
FR0000130577 Publicis Groupe SA PUB 13,740 9,466 75 3 -1.52 -1.26 0.54 07:24 09:56 06:11
FR0000130809 Soci´ et´ e G´ en´ erale GLE 33,722 32,204 317 7 -1.62 -1.52 0.83 06:11 04:15 05:27
FR0000131104 BNP BNP 70,354 33,015 364 3 -1.14 -1.03 0.28 04:13 03:39 02:38
FR0000131708 Technip TEC 7,942 10,665 75 6 -1.17 -1.08 0.48 13:36 11:2 1 10:06
FR0000131906 Renault RNO 17,064 14,722 118 5 -1.57 -1.33 0.88 10:46 1 3:01 08:41
FR0000133308 Orange ORA 23,630 21,114 167 5 -1.47 -1.25 0.82 10:04 1 0:41 06:28
FR0010208488 ENGIE ENGI 40,349 13,831 148 3 -2.02 -1.68 0.81 07:09 0 6:41 04:29
FR0010220475 Alstom ALO 8,126 11,838 81 10 -1.45 -1.47 0.67 09:45 07:4 7 08:29
FR0010242511 EDF EDF 47,729 9,368 64 2 -1.40 -1.40 0.67 03:37 03:37 02 :25

831 148 3 -2.02 -1.68 0.81 07:09 0 6:41 04:29
FR0010220475 Alstom ALO 8,126 11,838 81 10 -1.45 -1.47 0.67 09:45 07:4 7 08:29
FR0010242511 EDF EDF 47,729 9,368 64 2 -1.40 -1.40 0.67 03:37 03:37 02 :25
FR0010307819 Legrand LR 10,633 6,387 45 1 -1.08 -1.08 03:58 03:58
NL0000226223 STMicroelectronics STM 7,098 8,668 44 3 -2.60 -1.41 2.1 6 05:35 06:30 03:08
NL0000235190 EADS AIR 43,550 20,886 212 6 -0.88 -0.96 0.25 08:46 09:1 9 04:15
Note. We study tick-by-tick order-level data in a sample composed of 37 s tocks that were traded on NYSE Euronext Paris
in 2013 and are members of the CAC 40 index (we exclude Arcelor Mitta l, Gemalto, and Solvay, because their main trading
venue is not the Paris branch of NYSE Euronext). The table report s the average daily market capitalization (in million
euros, from Bloomberg), number of transactions, and trading vo lume (in million euros) of each stock. We apply the test
statistic of Christensen et al. (2022) to screen for downward drift burst EPMs, which shows 148 drift b urst EPMs aﬀecting
34 of the 37 included equities. # EPMs is the number of detected even ts in each stock. We report the mean, median, and
standard deviation of the rate of return (from beginning to troug h) and duration (in mm:ss) of stock-level events.
vii

Table B.3: Coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR for trading imbalance (f ull version)
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event 0.020 0.006 -0.007 0.031** -0.019 -0.012 0.013 0. 027* -0.010
(1.14) (0.42) (-0.77) (2.46) (-1.47) (-1.07) (1.40) (1.75) (-0.96)
Early drop -0.002 0.073*** 0.078* 0.290*** -0.020 -0.144** 0.055 0.038 -0.112**
(-0.04) (3.03) (1.69) (4.10) (-0.50) (-2.27) (1.64) (1.17) (-2.01)
Intermediate drop 0.193** 0.020 -0.025 0.176*** -0.085** - 0.055 0.102*** 0.013 -0.050
(2.44) (0.55) (-0.74) (3.86) (-2.03) (-1.47) (3.52) (0.36) (-1.10)
Late drop 0.113 0.025 0.017 0.227*** -0.267*** -0.006 0.206 *** 0.103* -0.150**
(1.17) (0.58) (0.30) (3.36) (-3.49) (-0.08) (5.15) (1.78) ( -2.17)
Recovery 0.006 0.014 -0.024** -0.010 -0.016 -0.018 0.006 0. 054*** -0.009
(0.34) (1.26) (-2.46) (-0.67) (-0.91) (-0.89) (0.36) (3.41 ) (-0.54)
Bid-ask spread 0.005 0.012* 0.002 0.006 0.001 -0.008 0.005 - 0.003 -0.001
(0.86) (1.93) (0.50) (1.20) (0.16) (-1.45) (1.10) (-0.46) ( -0.10)
Log(euro volume) 0.008 0.004 -0.018** 0.025** -0.026* 0.00 8 -0.019*** 0.016 -0.005
(1.32) (0.64) (-2.22) (2.33) (-1.83) (0.63) (-2.82) (0.96) (-0.46)
Return 0.012 0.012 0.021* -0.189*** 0.031*** 0.011 0.023** * 0.002 0.024***
(1.55) (1.26) (1.78) (-12.05) (3.66) (1.23) (3.01) (0.23) ( 2.99)
¯R2 0.010 0.006 0.003 0.057 0.039 0.024 0.016 0.020 0.024
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs

.031*** 0.011 0.023** * 0.002 0.024***
(1.55) (1.26) (1.78) (-12.05) (3.66) (1.23) (3.01) (0.23) ( 2.99)
¯R2 0.010 0.006 0.003 0.057 0.039 0.024 0.016 0.020 0.024
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event -0.007 -0.017 0.015 -0.010 0.018 -0.024 -0.011 0. 039* -0.017
(-0.85) (-0.92) (0.79) (-0.39) (1.00) (-1.28) (-0.66) (1.8 4) (-1.01)
Early drop -0.012 0.008 -0.059 0.003 0.040 -0.152** 0.009 0. 305*** -0.129
(-0.52) (0.51) (-1.05) (0.04) (0.46) (-2.07) (0.12) (3.30) (-1.03)
Intermediate drop 0.038 0.130* -0.136** -0.164 0.131 -0.34 9*** -0.244** 0.455*** 0.154
(1.66) (1.90) (-2.32) (-1.29) (1.05) (-3.51) (-2.08) (3.08 ) (0.92)
Late drop 0.082 0.146 -0.088 -0.374** -0.002 -0.087 -0.708* ** 0.490*** 0.227***
(1.14) (1.26) (-1.27) (-2.27) (-0.02) (-0.97) (-4.59) (3.6 2) (2.82)
Recovery 0.012 -0.010 0.012 -0.041 -0.015 0.028 -0.044** 0. 016 0.007
(0.96) (-0.82) (0.49) (-1.38) (-0.58) (1.45) (-2.49) (1.00 ) (0.38)
Bid-ask spread -0.005 0.005 0.006 -0.007 0.003 -0.003 0.003 -0.006 0.013*
(-0.92) (0.79) (0.63) (-0.69) (0.26) (-0.53) (0.44) (-0.90 ) (1.83)
Log(euro volume) 0.010** 0.006 -0.023 -0.143*** 0.047** -0 .022 -0.102*** 0.060** 0.074**
(2.35) (1.19) (-1.29) (-7.61) (2.33) (-1.13) (-7.34) (2.75 ) (2.68)
Return -0.000 0.018*** 0.031 -0.076*** 0.030** 0.006 0.054 *** -0.028** -0.020**
(-0.03) (3.51) (1.09) (-3.64) (2.14) (0.61) (5.11) (-2.58) (-2.10)

1.29) (-7.61) (2.33) (-1.13) (-7.34) (2.75 ) (2.68)
Return -0.000 0.018*** 0.031 -0.076*** 0.030** 0.006 0.054 *** -0.028** -0.020**
(-0.03) (3.51) (1.09) (-3.64) (2.14) (0.61) (5.11) (-2.58) (-2.10)
¯R2 0.041 0.004 0.009 0.070 0.031 0.022 0.029 0.031 0.032
Note. We present the results of the V AR in equation ( 9). The model is estimated separately for unsystematic drift burst
EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel B. The dependent varia ble is the 10-second trading imbalance of the trader
category indicated by the column label. The explanatory variables “P re-event”, “Early drop”, “Intermediate drop”, “Late
drop”, and “Recovery” refer to phase dummies of a drift burst EP M. “Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread (in percent),
“Log(euro volume)” is the log-euro volume, and “Return” is the con temporaneous stock return. We also include stock ﬁxed
eﬀects. The non-dummy variables are standardized at the stock le vel. The coeﬃcient estimates of lagged trading imbalances
are not reported for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard errors clustered
at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs = 342,032 in Panel A and nObs =
79,404 in Panel B.
viii

Table B.4: Coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR for aggressive trading imbalance (full version)
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event -0.004 -0.005 -0.006 0.003 -0.024** -0.018* 0.00 4 -0.008 -0.006
(-0.30) (-0.44) (-0.75) (0.31) (-1.99) (-1.95) (0.37) (-1. 01) (-0.87)
Early drop -0.011 0.034 0.021 -0.037 -0.082* -0.167*** 0.04 8 -0.067** -0.110**
(-0.28) (1.27) (0.54) (-1.13) (-1.82) (-2.92) (1.49) (-2.4 2) (-2.62)
Intermediate drop 0.058* 0.003 0.011 0.037 -0.116*** -0.05 8* 0.083*** -0.054* -0.054
(1.78) (0.12) (0.29) (1.10) (-2.69) (-1.67) (3.09) (-1.98) (-1.25)
Late drop 0.019 0.046 0.055 0.012 -0.341*** -0.065 0.189*** -0.188*** -0.166***
(0.41) (1.17) (0.99) (0.24) (-4.54) (-0.91) (4.69) (-2.73) (-2.79)
Recovery 0.008 0.010 -0.016 -0.011 -0.023 -0.036** 0.001 0. 036* -0.002
(0.45) (0.71) (-1.47) (-0.80) (-1.33) (-2.45) (0.07) (1.92 ) (-0.20)
Bid-ask spread 0.005 0.010 0.001 0.006 0.008 -0.006 0.010* - 0.007 0.004
(1.14) (1.60) (0.15) (1.26) (1.14) (-1.02) (1.72) (-1.03) ( 0.51)
Log(euro volume) -0.007 -0.009* -0.020*** -0.013 -0.033** * -0.015* -0.020*** -0.015 -0.014
(-1.26) (-1.68) (-2.85) (-1.48) (-2.77) (-1.69) (-3.17) (- 1.50) (-1.52)
Return 0.086*** 0.091*** 0.239*** 0.142*** 0.161*** 0.199 *** 0.113*** 0.173*** 0.117***
(14.89) (9.12) (22.11) (12.90) (18.90) (22.27) (16.10) (21 .73) (13.17)
¯R2 0.008 0.010 0.054 0.029 0.049 0.050 0.019 0.035 0.028

91*** 0.239*** 0.142*** 0.161*** 0.199 *** 0.113*** 0.173*** 0.117***
(14.89) (9.12) (22.11) (12.90) (18.90) (22.27) (16.10) (21 .73) (13.17)
¯R2 0.008 0.010 0.054 0.029 0.049 0.050 0.019 0.035 0.028
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event 0.017 -0.002 0.047** 0.040* 0.031 0.022 -0.007 0. 036** 0.011
(1.56) (-0.12) (2.33) (1.90) (1.40) (1.44) (-0.39) (2.19) ( 0.67)
Early drop -0.003 0.004 -0.086* 0.074 -0.071 -0.188* 0.005 0 .109*** -0.148
(-0.13) (0.12) (-1.86) (0.76) (-1.03) (-2.03) (0.08) (3.05 ) (-1.00)
Intermediate drop 0.069 0.102* -0.066 -0.049 -0.021 -0.354 *** -0.278** 0.074 -0.027
(1.32) (1.92) (-1.29) (-0.40) (-0.52) (-3.76) (-2.30) (1.2 2) (-0.35)
Late drop 0.117*** 0.203** 0.182** -0.309** -0.109 -0.074 - 0.509*** 0.068 0.209***
(4.15) (2.49) (2.72) (-2.19) (-1.31) (-1.01) (-3.32) (0.87 ) (3.30)
Recovery -0.022 -0.023* 0.010 -0.078*** -0.040** -0.031** -0.045** -0.010 -0.034
(-1.41) (-1.87) (0.35) (-2.92) (-2.53) (-2.34) (-2.62) (-0 .58) (-1.62)
Bid-ask spread 0.001 0.003 0.018** 0.010 0.007 0.011 0.009 - 0.010 0.021**
(0.27) (0.37) (2.13) (1.09) (0.64) (1.68) (1.43) (-1.36) (2 .51)
Log(euro volume) 0.005 -0.000 -0.010 -0.108*** -0.003 -0.0 64*** -0.086*** 0.005 0.043***
(1.17) (-0.04) (-0.74) (-6.12) (-0.21) (-3.14) (-9.13) (0. 32) (3.29)
Return 0.073*** 0.074*** 0.248*** 0.178*** 0.125*** 0.117 *** 0.115*** 0.088*** 0.065***

.003 -0.0 64*** -0.086*** 0.005 0.043***
(1.17) (-0.04) (-0.74) (-6.12) (-0.21) (-3.14) (-9.13) (0. 32) (3.29)
Return 0.073*** 0.074*** 0.248*** 0.178*** 0.125*** 0.117 *** 0.115*** 0.088*** 0.065***
(9.45) (10.20) (10.29) (10.70) (6.22) (11.38) (13.38) (9.4 9) (7.40)
¯R2 0.010 0.013 0.087 0.085 0.042 0.041 0.038 0.019 0.019
Note. We present the results of the V AR in equation ( 9). The model is estimated separately for unsystematic drift burst
EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel B. The dependent varia ble is the 10-second aggressive trading imbalance
of the trader category indicated by the column label. The explanato ry variables “Pre-event”, “Early drop”, “Intermediate
drop”, “Late drop”, and “Recovery” refer to phase dummies of a drift burst EPM. “Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread (in
percent), “Log(euro volume)” is the log-euro volume, and “Retur n” is the contemporaneous stock return. We also include
stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The non-dummy variables are standardized at the stock level. The coeﬃcient estimates of lagged trading
imbalances are not reported for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard
errors clustered at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs = 342,032 in Panel A
and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
ix

Table B.5: Coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR for passive trading imba lance (full version)
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event 0.021 0.004 -0.006 0.033*** -0.007 0.005 0.018** * 0.038** -0.010
(1.41) (0.27) (-0.59) (2.68) (-0.65) (0.51) (2.66) (2.30) ( -0.77)
Early drop 0.009 0.031 0.099** 0.346*** 0.075 0.018 0.038 0. 093*** -0.034
(0.27) (1.42) (2.54) (4.75) (1.59) (0.56) (1.07) (2.67) (-0 .80)
Intermediate drop 0.146* 0.008 -0.057* 0.187*** -0.020 0.0 16 0.065** 0.055 -0.008
(1.82) (0.30) (-1.89) (3.93) (-0.65) (0.45) (2.00) (1.32) ( -0.22)
Late drop 0.053 -0.015 -0.060 0.239*** -0.003 0.095 0.074** * 0.254*** -0.026
(0.74) (-0.43) (-1.18) (3.86) (-0.04) (1.63) (2.75) (3.97) (-0.39)
Recovery -0.005 0.006 -0.021** -0.005 -0.007 0.014 0.011 0. 039*** -0.005
(-0.63) (0.45) (-2.58) (-0.32) (-0.43) (0.63) (0.98) (3.00 ) (-0.27)
Bid-ask spread -0.004 0.004 0.001 0.003 -0.006 -0.004 -0.00 3 0.003 -0.007
(-0.86) (0.89) (0.11) (0.58) (-0.82) (-0.50) (-0.57) (0.52 ) (-1.24)
Log(euro volume) 0.014*** 0.013** -0.002 0.036*** -0.000 0 .024** -0.008 0.034** 0.008
(2.66) (2.15) (-0.29) (3.98) (-0.00) (2.13) (-1.01) (2.29) (0.90)
Return -0.082*** -0.086*** -0.300*** -0.312*** -0.111*** -0.208*** -0.116*** -0.129*** -0.077***
(-14.40) (-8.43) (-29.38) (-22.59) (-11.40) (-23.90) (-14 .13) (-13.38) (-10.29)
¯R2 0.009 0.009 0.082 0.106 0.035 0.060 0.023 0.041 0.022

-0.312*** -0.111*** -0.208*** -0.116*** -0.129*** -0.077***
(-14.40) (-8.43) (-29.38) (-22.59) (-11.40) (-23.90) (-14 .13) (-13.38) (-10.29)
¯R2 0.009 0.009 0.082 0.106 0.035 0.060 0.023 0.041 0.022
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Pre-event -0.031** -0.035* -0.033** -0.051 -0.009 -0.055* * -0.012 0.024 -0.033*
(-2.30) (-1.97) (-2.21) (-1.67) (-0.59) (-2.17) (-0.80) (1 .05) (-1.74)
Early drop -0.018 0.004 0.019 -0.053 0.075 0.001 0.038 0.298 ** -0.016
(-0.52) (0.11) (0.41) (-1.15) (0.84) (0.02) (0.81) (2.70) ( -0.44)
Intermediate drop -0.044 0.060 -0.100** -0.145 0.165 -0.03 6 -0.018 0.503*** 0.255
(-0.85) (0.61) (-2.09) (-1.66) (1.09) (-0.77) (-0.36) (3.2 1) (1.38)
Late drop -0.071 -0.138*** -0.314*** -0.284** 0.051 -0.018 -0.345*** 0.551*** 0.143
(-1.22) (-3.31) (-4.10) (-2.20) (0.55) (-0.23) (-3.85) (3. 24) (1.48)
Recovery 0.025 0.011 0.001 -0.003 0.008 0.080*** -0.012 0.0 33 0.040**
(1.54) (0.62) (0.14) (-0.14) (0.30) (2.92) (-0.63) (1.52) ( 2.14)
Bid-ask spread -0.001 -0.000 -0.012 -0.014 -0.003 -0.020** * -0.009 0.002 -0.000
(-0.13) (-0.00) (-1.33) (-1.44) (-0.70) (-3.54) (-1.60) (0 .24) (-0.06)
Log(euro volume) 0.001 0.010 -0.018 -0.089*** 0.066*** 0.0 48** -0.042** 0.068*** 0.061**
(0.09) (1.21) (-1.66) (-6.45) (3.79) (2.72) (-2.65) (3.37) (2.13)
Return -0.084*** -0.072*** -0.266*** -0.227*** -0.077*** -0.135*** -0.077*** -0.099*** -0.074***

* 0.0 48** -0.042** 0.068*** 0.061**
(0.09) (1.21) (-1.66) (-6.45) (3.79) (2.72) (-2.65) (3.37) (2.13)
Return -0.084*** -0.072*** -0.266*** -0.227*** -0.077*** -0.135*** -0.077*** -0.099*** -0.074***
(-9.81) (-8.64) (-14.22) (-10.36) (-9.62) (-12.24) (-8.04 ) (-7.32) (-6.60)
¯R2 0.014 0.013 0.095 0.091 0.041 0.056 0.015 0.053 0.036
Note. We present the results of the V AR in equation ( 9). The model is estimated separately for unsystematic drift burst
EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Panel B. The dependent varia ble is the 10-second passive trading imbalance of
the trader category indicated by the column label. The explanatory variables “Pre-event”, “Early drop”, “Intermediate
drop”, “Late drop”, and “Recovery” refer to phase dummies of a drift burst EPM. “Bid-ask spread” is the quoted spread (in
percent), “Log(euro volume)” is the log-euro volume, and “Retur n” is the contemporaneous stock return. We also include
stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The non-dummy variables are standardized at the stock level. The coeﬃcient estimates of lagged trading
imbalances are not reported for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust standard
errors clustered at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs = 342,032 in Panel A
and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
x

Table B.6: Proﬁt and loss of trading activity (full version)
Panel A: Unsystematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Dummy -0.013 0.060 0.108 -0.347*** 0.419*** 0.842** -0.145 ** -0.162 0.539***
(-0.21) (0.76) (0.84) (-2.99) (2.85) (2.35) (-2.54) (-0.99 ) (2.69)
Bid-ask spread -0.030* 0.092 0.483** 0.005 0.230 0.710 0.05 2 0.022 -0.122
(-1.76) (1.28) (2.55) (0.05) (1.19) (1.08) (0.83) (0.10) (- 0.74)
Log(euro Volume) -0.006 0.068 0.581*** -0.073 0.133 0.356* * 0.084** -0.609*** 0.110
(-0.48) (1.30) (5.82) (-1.23) (1.31) (2.37) (2.56) (-4.04) (1.15)
Return -0.005 -0.036 0.066 -0.101 -0.986* -0.436 -0.003 0.1 48 -0.451
(-0.08) (-0.24) (0.22) (-0.42) (-1.88) (-0.69) (-0.02) (0. 32) (-1.59)
¯R2 0.008 0.011 0.013 0.013 0.029 0.014 0.008 0.018 0.008
Panel B: Systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-CLIENTPURE-HFT OWNPURE-HFT MMIB-HFT MMIB-CLIENTIB -HFT OWNIB-HFT PARENTNON-HFT CLIENTNON-HFT OWN
Dummy 0.039** 0.013 0.894* 0.729** -0.398 1.514*** 0.803** * -0.964** -0.391
(2.35) (0.17) (2.05) (2.22) (-1.64) (2.93) (2.86) (-2.31) ( -1.06)
Bid-ask spread 0.038* -0.057 0.308** -0.030 0.518*** 0.755 *** 0.117 -0.264** -0.217
(2.02) (-1.53) (2.25) (-0.18) (2.99) (2.97) (1.52) (-2.20) (-1.41)
Log(euro Volume) -0.005 -0.016 1.035*** 0.040 0.081 -0.068 0.361*** -0.743*** -0.457**
(-0.44) (-0.44) (3.58) (0.33) (0.60) (-0.31) (4.89) (-3.61 ) (-2.44)

-0.18) (2.99) (2.97) (1.52) (-2.20) (-1.41)
Log(euro Volume) -0.005 -0.016 1.035*** 0.040 0.081 -0.068 0.361*** -0.743*** -0.457**
(-0.44) (-0.44) (3.58) (0.33) (0.60) (-0.31) (4.89) (-3.61 ) (-2.44)
Return 0.006 -0.016 -0.054 -2.049*** 0.104 -0.816 -1.226** * 0.839*** 0.936***
(0.17) (-0.38) (-0.16) (-7.02) (0.44) (-1.60) (-5.78) (3.1 7) (4.00)
¯R2 0.058 0.008 0.022 0.087 0.006 0.016 0.053 0.022 0.012
Note. This table presents coeﬃcient estimates from the V AR in equation ( 12). The model is estimated separately for
unsystematic drift burst EPMs in Panel A and systematic ones in Pan el B. The dependent variable is the 10-second proﬁt
and loss (P&L) of the trader category indicated by the column label. “Dummy” equals one for the entire duration of the
drift burst EPM (from the beginning of the pre-event until the end of the recovery), zero otherwise, “Bid-ask spread” is the
quoted spread (in percent), “Log(euro volume)” is the log-euro v olume, and “Return” is the contemporaneous stock return.
We also include stock ﬁxed eﬀects. The non-dummy variables are sta ndardized at the stock level. The coeﬃcient estimates
of the lagged P&L are not reported for brevity. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on heteroscedasticity-r obust
standard errors clustered at the stock and date level. * P -value<0.1; ** P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01. nObs = 342,032 in
Panel A and nObs = 79,404 in Panel B.
xi

Figure B.1: Individual stock price changes during systematic drift b urst EPMs
Panel A: April 17, 2013. Panel B: September 3, 2013.
09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00
Time
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Cumulative return (in %)
10:50 10:55 11:00 11:05
Time
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Cumulative return (in %)
Note. This ﬁgure shows the price evolution of the equities included in our ana lysis during the
systematic drift bursts EPMs detected on April 17, 2013 (in Panel A) and September 3, 2013
(in Panel B). We include a 15-minute window spanning the trough.
xii

Figure B.2: Changes in trading imbalance for an unsystematic drift bu rst EPM
Panel A: IB-HFT OWN Panel B: IB-HFT MM Panel C: PURE-HFT MM
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
EARLY
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
EARLY
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
EARLY
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
INTERMEDIATE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
LATE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
LATE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
LATE
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
RECOVERY
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
RECOVERY
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Count
RECOVERY
Note. The ﬁgure depicts a histogram of the empirical distribution of one-m inute changes in
trading imbalance for IB-HFT OWN (Panel A), IB-HFT MM (Panel B), and PURE-HFT MM
(Panel C) at diﬀerent stages of an unsystematic drift burst EPM. A negative number means
that the trader category is collectively selling either via aggressive o r passive trades, and vice
versa.
xiii

C Alternative analysis of trading activity
In this appendix, we look at the question of whether DMMs change th eir trading activity during
drift burst EPMs. We rely on
Kirilenko et al. (2017), who employ an error correction model
to changes in inventory of diﬀerent trader groups. They show tha t HFTs did not alter their
behavior during the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010. We arrive at the opp osite conclusion regarding
DMMs in our sample of drift burst EPMs, which is possibly due to the fac t that we analyze 148
events instead of a single one.
The econometric model reads:
∆yt = α + φ∆yt−1 + δyt−1 +
3∑
i=0
βi∆pt−i
+ DD
(
αD + φD∆yt−1 + δDyt−1 +
3∑
i=0
βD
i ∆pt−i
)
+ DU
(
αU + φU ∆yt−1 + δU yt−1 +
3∑
i=0
βU
i ∆pt−i
)
+ εt,
(C.1)
where DD is a dummy activated during the drift burst EPM (from tstart to ttrough according to
the deﬁnitions in the main text), while DU is a dummy activated during the recovery (from
ttrough to tend), yt is the net inventory of each trader category at time t (measured in million
euros and assumed to start from zero at the beginning of each day ), ∆ yt is the ﬁrst diﬀerence of
yt, pt is the log-price at time t (measured as the midpoint of the prevailing bid and ask quote),
and ∆ pt is the log-return from t − 1 to t.26
The model allows the slopes on the explanatory variables to shift dur ing the day. We estimate
26The model is slightly modiﬁed compared to Kirilenko et al. (2017). In particular, we use three 10-second

e model allows the slopes on the explanatory variables to shift dur ing the day. We estimate
26The model is slightly modiﬁed compared to Kirilenko et al. (2017). In particular, we use three 10-second
lags (as opposed to 20 one-second lags in their paper), and we regr ess on log-returns (as opposed to price changes
in their paper) to ensure a greater uniformity across stocks and d ays.
xiv

equation (C.1) for each day with a drift burst EPM and for each trader category separately. The
data are recorded on a 10-second grid. A change in trading attitud e during a particular phase
should thus emerge via signiﬁcant coeﬃcient estimates in front of th e drift burst EPM or recovery
explanatory variables.
The average coeﬃcient estimates, together with their associated t-statistics, are reported in
Tables C.1 – C.2 for unsystematic and systematic events. To compute the t-statistic of the
average regression coeﬃcient, we assume the individual estimates are independent, but we allow
for heteroskedasticity with a White correction. Apart from the fa ct that the regression yields
signiﬁcant coeﬃcients in a lot of instances, below are our key ﬁndings .
Kirilenko et al. (2017) report a signiﬁcant negative coeﬃcient on the lagged inventory lev el
in their pre-ﬂash crash period (which is interpreted as an indication o f mean-reversion), but
no signiﬁcant changes during the ﬂash crash or in its aftermath. In stead, we ﬁnd that mean-
reversion is much stronger for all trader categories during the dr ift burst EPM and recovery
compared to the pre-event and post-recovery period. There is o ne exception to this regularity,
which is the positive but insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of IB-HFT MM during th e drift burst EPM
(and also in normal times, where it is signiﬁcant) for systematic even ts, denoting a lack of mean
reversion.

which is the positive but insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of IB-HFT MM during th e drift burst EPM
(and also in normal times, where it is signiﬁcant) for systematic even ts, denoting a lack of mean
reversion. This observation is consistent with the reported tradin g activity in Panel A of Figure
6.
Kirilenko et al. (2017) ﬁnd that HFTs inventory changes are positively related to contem -
poraneous and lagged price changes for the ﬁrst few seconds of t he ﬂash crash, before turning
negatively correlated. Furthermore, inventory changes of mark et makers are negatively related
to contemporaneous price change and positively correlated with lag ged ones. We broadly conﬁrm
xv

Table C.1: Inventory changes during unsystematic drift burst EPM s
PURE-HFT PURE-HFT IB-HFT IB-HFT IB NON-HFT NON-HFT
MM OWN MM OWN CLIENT CLIENT OWN
Panel A: Outside drift burst EPM
constant −0.000∗∗∗ 0.000 0 .000∗ 0.000 −0.000∗∗∗ 0.000 0 .000
(−4.62) (0 .73) (1 .74) (1 .09) ( −4.85) (1 .22) (1 .34)
∆yt−1 0.004 0 .029∗∗∗ 0.065∗∗∗ 0.091∗∗∗ 0.099∗∗∗ 0.081∗∗∗ 0.080∗∗∗
(1.15) (3 .73) (15 .01) (19 .59) (13 .81) (14 .70) (8 .35)
yt−1 −0.002∗∗∗ −0.001 0 .000 0 .000 −0.000 −0.001∗∗∗ −0.000
(−13.82) ( −1.37) (0 .91) (1 .12) ( −0.77) ( −7.44) ( −1.55)
∆pt 0.181∗∗∗ 0.002 −0.227∗∗∗ −0.064∗∗ 0.050 −0.107∗∗∗ 0.061∗∗∗
(11.34) (0 .13) ( −14.12) ( −2.37) (1 .60) ( −3.99) (2 .61)
∆pt−1 −0.086∗∗∗ −0.020∗∗ 0.030∗∗∗ 0.097∗∗∗ 0.018 −0.054∗∗∗ 0.020
(−9.13) ( −2.22) (3 .82) (5 .24) (1 .39) ( −2.88) (1 .20)
∆pt−2 −0.041∗∗∗ −0.008 −0.011∗ 0.003 0 .039∗∗∗ −0.004 0 .004
(−4.79) ( −1.06) ( −1.75) (0 .13) (3 .81) ( −0.20) (0 .28)
∆pt−3 −0.050∗∗∗ −0.003 −0.011∗ 0.045∗∗∗ 0.025∗∗ −0.012 −0.006
(−5.84) ( −0.49) ( −1.74) (2 .93) (2 .34) ( −0.73) ( −0.30)
Panel B: During drift burst EPM ( DD)
constant −0.000 0 .000 0 .001∗∗∗ 0.001 0 .003 0 .006∗∗∗ −0.000
(−0.26) (0 .27) (4 .47) (0 .81) (0 .86) (2 .90) ( −0.21)
∆yt−1 −0.029∗ −0.063∗∗ −0.076∗∗∗ −0.051∗∗∗ −0.040∗ −0.061∗∗∗ −0.032
(−1.87) ( −2.08) ( −4.37) ( −3.04) ( −1.85) ( −3.85) ( −1.37)
yt−1 −0.092∗∗∗ −0.047∗∗∗ −0.040∗∗∗ −0.061∗∗∗ −0.035∗∗∗ −0.027∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗
(−9.86) ( −3.22) ( −7.38) ( −7.68) ( −4.35) ( −3.73) ( −4.88)

(−1.87) ( −2.08) ( −4.37) ( −3.04) ( −1.85) ( −3.85) ( −1.37)
yt−1 −0.092∗∗∗ −0.047∗∗∗ −0.040∗∗∗ −0.061∗∗∗ −0.035∗∗∗ −0.027∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗
(−9.86) ( −3.22) ( −7.38) ( −7.68) ( −4.35) ( −3.73) ( −4.88)
∆pt 0.045 0 .012 −0.676∗∗∗ 1.034∗∗∗ 0.076 −0.834∗∗∗ 0.205∗
(0.47) (0 .14) ( −7.47) (7 .04) (0 .63) ( −4.45) (1 .91)
∆pt−1 −0.063 0 .068 −0.088 −0.282∗∗ 0.148 0 .001 0 .307∗∗∗
(−0.91) (1 .40) ( −1.40) ( −2.36) (1 .48) (0 .00) (2 .70)
∆pt−2 0.014 0 .059 0 .040 0 .085 0 .095 0 .030 −0.084
(0.25) (1 .49) (0 .79) (0 .80) (1 .06) (0 .28) ( −1.07)
∆pt−3 0.054 0 .025 −0.113∗∗ −0.164∗ 0.046 −0.045 0 .127∗
(0.91) (0 .60) ( −2.20) ( −1.74) (0 .59) ( −0.48) (1 .73)
Panel C: Recovery phase ( DU )
constant −0.001∗ −0.001∗ 0.003∗∗∗ 0.001 −0.003∗∗ 0.003∗∗∗ −0.001∗∗∗
(−1.78) ( −1.94) (6 .70) (0 .82) ( −2.35) (2 .96) ( −3.68)
∆yt−1 −0.019 0 .042∗ −0.043∗∗∗ −0.037∗∗∗ −0.013 −0.022 −0.029
(−1.60) (1 .66) ( −3.05) ( −2.83) ( −0.82) ( −1.59) ( −1.27)
yt−1 −0.052∗∗∗ −0.071∗∗∗ −0.054∗∗∗ −0.047∗∗∗ −0.033∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗ −0.037∗∗∗
(−12.37) ( −5.59) ( −9.18) ( −11.21) ( −9.89) ( −8.67) ( −6.37)
∆pt −0.303∗∗∗ 0.226∗∗ −0.222∗∗∗ 0.167∗ −0.107 0 .424∗∗∗ −0.101
(−4.99) (2 .10) ( −4.30) (1 .84) ( −1.40) (3 .67) ( −1.45)
∆pt−1 0.090∗∗ 0.023 −0.058∗ −0.129∗ −0.017 −0.024 0 .006
(2.31) (0 .24) ( −1.74) ( −1.85) ( −0.26) ( −0.37) (0 .12)
∆pt−2 0.010 0 .205∗ 0.023 −0.061 0 .123∗∗ −0.052 −0.071
(0.31) (1 .89) (0 .81) ( −1.10) (2 .14) ( −0.89) ( −1.45)
∆pt−3 0.086∗∗ 0.167 −0.017 0 .015 −0.069 −0.004 0 .027

.85) ( −0.26) ( −0.37) (0 .12)
∆pt−2 0.010 0 .205∗ 0.023 −0.061 0 .123∗∗ −0.052 −0.071
(0.31) (1 .89) (0 .81) ( −1.10) (2 .14) ( −0.89) ( −1.45)
∆pt−3 0.086∗∗ 0.167 −0.017 0 .015 −0.069 −0.004 0 .027
(2.02) (1 .29) ( −0.52) (0 .25) ( −1.32) ( −0.05) (0 .50)
Note. The signiﬁcance of the regression coeﬃcient estimate is evaluated w ith a standard t-
test assuming independence but adjusted for heteroskedasticit y (in parentheses). * P -value<0.1;
**P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01.
this with appropriate interpretation of various trader groups. Fo r example, in Kirilenko et al.
(2017) IB-HFT MM and IB-HFT OWN correspond to market makers, while PU RE-HFT MM
correspond to HFTs. The main diﬀerence is the signiﬁcant changes f or the price/inventory co-
xvi

Table C.2: Inventory changes during systematic drift burst EPMs
PURE-HFT PURE-HFT IB-HFT IB-HFT IB NON-HFT NON-HFT
MM OWN MM OWN CLIENT CLIENT OWN
Panel A: Outside drift burst EPM
constant −0.000∗∗∗ −0.000 0 .000 0 .000∗∗ 0.000 0 .000 −0.000
(−4.11) ( −1.11) (0 .46) (2 .17) (1 .51) (1 .18) ( −0.13)
∆yt−1 −0.006 0 .011 0 .060∗∗∗ 0.083∗∗∗ 0.037∗ 0.058∗∗∗ 0.097∗∗∗
(−0.73) (1 .21) (5 .60) (6 .23) (1 .93) (5 .98) (4 .29)
yt−1 −0.005∗∗∗ 0.000 0 .000∗∗∗ 0.000 0 .000 −0.000 0 .000
(−8.43) (0 .20) (5 .16) (0 .08) (1 .56) ( −1.06) (1 .34)
∆pt −0.036 0 .006 −0.038∗ 0.021 0 .081∗∗∗ 0.025 −0.072∗∗
(−1.19) (0 .69) ( −1.87) (0 .43) (3 .78) (0 .59) ( −2.35)
∆pt−1 −0.067∗∗∗ −0.004 0 .040∗∗∗ 0.050∗∗ 0.010 −0.005 −0.030∗
(−4.35) ( −0.97) (3 .95) (1 .97) (0 .52) ( −0.46) ( −1.92)
∆pt−2 −0.048∗∗∗ −0.003 0 .012 0 .007 0 .029∗∗∗ 0.019 0 .003
(−3.73) ( −1.17) (1 .29) (0 .34) (2 .64) (1 .64) (0 .14)
∆pt−3 −0.038∗∗∗ 0.001 0 .014 −0.006 0 .022∗ 0.009 0 .026
(−2.82) (0 .23) (1 .47) ( −0.27) (1 .70) (0 .66) (1 .24)
Panel B: During drift burst EPM ( DD)
constant 0 .000 −0.000 0 .000 0 .000 −0.000∗ 0.001∗∗∗ 0.000
(1.02) ( −0.99) (0 .19) (0 .06) ( −1.89) (2 .71) (1 .53)
∆yt−1 −0.039 −0.043 −0.075∗ −0.020 0 .045 −0.048 −0.010
(−1.06) ( −1.19) ( −1.77) ( −0.64) (1 .17) ( −1.48) ( −0.19)
yt−1 −0.089∗∗∗ −0.055∗∗∗ 0.006 −0.060∗∗∗ −0.032∗∗∗ −0.025∗∗∗ −0.017
(−5.14) ( −2.71) (0 .48) ( −3.25) ( −2.71) ( −2.67) ( −1.51)
∆pt 0.341∗∗∗ 0.036 0 .119∗∗ −0.019 0 .029 −0.652∗∗∗ −0.397∗

) ( −0.19)
yt−1 −0.089∗∗∗ −0.055∗∗∗ 0.006 −0.060∗∗∗ −0.032∗∗∗ −0.025∗∗∗ −0.017
(−5.14) ( −2.71) (0 .48) ( −3.25) ( −2.71) ( −2.67) ( −1.51)
∆pt 0.341∗∗∗ 0.036 0 .119∗∗ −0.019 0 .029 −0.652∗∗∗ −0.397∗
(3.50) (0 .90) (2 .05) ( −0.11) (0 .25) ( −4.45) ( −1.65)
∆pt−1 −0.095 0 .016∗ 0.079∗ 0.128 −0.080 −0.138∗ 0.032
(−1.27) (1 .76) (1 .88) (1 .07) ( −1.10) ( −1.88) (0 .24)
∆pt−2 −0.052 0 .020 −0.008 0 .016 0 .050 −0.118 0 .198
(−0.79) (1 .22) ( −0.17) (0 .09) (0 .61) ( −1.24) (1 .28)
∆pt−3 −0.038 0 .010 −0.061 0 .211∗ −0.033 −0.039 −0.037
(−0.74) (0 .98) ( −1.44) (1 .85) ( −0.59) ( −0.56) ( −0.53)
Panel C: Recovery phase ( DU )
constant −0.001∗∗∗ −0.000∗∗ −0.001∗∗∗ 0.001 0 .000 0 .001 0 .005∗∗∗
(−4.67) ( −2.45) ( −4.46) (1 .12) (0 .52) (0 .77) (6 .50)
∆yt−1 −0.001 −0.013 −0.068∗∗∗ −0.021 0 .002 −0.037 −0.037
(−0.03) ( −0.52) ( −2.59) ( −0.81) (0 .05) ( −1.20) ( −1.14)
yt−1 −0.085∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗ −0.023∗∗∗ −0.050∗∗∗ −0.059∗∗∗ −0.016∗∗ −0.119∗∗∗
(−6.42) ( −3.91) ( −4.55) ( −4.61) ( −4.59) ( −2.09) ( −10.76)
∆pt 0.153∗∗∗ −0.006 −0.052 −0.072 −0.089 −0.062 −0.010
(2.70) ( −0.60) ( −1.27) ( −0.68) ( −1.47) ( −0.82) ( −0.14)
∆pt−1 −0.000 0 .010∗ 0.078∗∗∗ −0.055 0 .007 0 .082 −0.101
(−0.00) (1 .90) (2 .64) ( −0.67) (0 .13) (1 .35) ( −1.18)
∆pt−2 0.073∗∗ 0.011∗∗ 0.016 0 .012 0 .007 0 .014 −0.056
(2.00) (2 .22) (0 .66) (0 .15) (0 .19) (0 .26) ( −1.18)
∆pt−3 0.089∗∗ 0.002 0 .074∗∗∗ −0.077 0 .033 −0.004 −0.147∗∗
(2.38) (0 .38) (2 .62) ( −0.73) (0 .87) ( −0.08) ( −2.10)
Note.

0 .007 0 .014 −0.056
(2.00) (2 .22) (0 .66) (0 .15) (0 .19) (0 .26) ( −1.18)
∆pt−3 0.089∗∗ 0.002 0 .074∗∗∗ −0.077 0 .033 −0.004 −0.147∗∗
(2.38) (0 .38) (2 .62) ( −0.73) (0 .87) ( −0.08) ( −2.10)
Note. The signiﬁcance of the regression coeﬃcient estimate is evaluated w ith a standard t-
test assuming independence but adjusted for heteroskedasticit y (in parentheses). * P -value<0.1;
**P -value<0.05; *** P -value<0.01.
eﬃcients during the drift burst EPM and recovery. While IB-HFT MM in ventories are more
signiﬁcantly negatively correlated to contemporaneous price chan ges during unsystematic drift
burst EPMs, signalling a larger inventory absorption, the opposite h olds for systematic events,
xvii

since they are net sellers (see Figure 6). The slow traders (i.e., NON-HFT CLIENT and NON-
HFT OWN) exhibit negative correlations of their inventory changes w ith contemporaneous price
changes during systematic events, consistent with the fact that they act as liquidity providers.
Summarizing, the analysis of the regression model in equation ( C.1) yields the following
conclusion. First, it provides further statistical evidence in favor of our results about trading
imbalances of DMMs, since it also underlines signiﬁcant changes in inven tory management of
those traders during drift burst EPMs at an alternative frequenc y and with a diﬀerent statistical
model. Second, the signiﬁcant change in inventory is robust to inter action with prices. That is,
when price changes are part of the model, the behavior of DMMs still changes during the drift
burst EPMs compared to normal times, in line with our ﬁndings in the ma in text. In particular,
the estimated model parameters conﬁrm that DMMs consume liquidit y during systematic events,
and that the role of liquidity providers is implicitly overtaken by fundam ental players, i.e., NON-
HFTs.
xviii
