1 
 
Behavioural finance and cryptocurrencies 
 
Antonis Ballis1 and Thanos Verousis2 
Abstract 
The present study sets out to examine the empirical literature on the behavioural aspects of 
cryptocurrencies, showing the findings of related studies and discussing the various results. 
A systematic literature review of cryptocurrencies in behavioural finance seems to be 
timely and particularly i mportant in terms of providing a guide for future research. Key 
topics include an extent review on the issue of herding behaviour among cryptocurrencies, 
momentum effects and overreaction, contagion effect, sentiment and uncertainty, along 
with studies related to investment decision making, optimism bias, disposition, lottery and 
size effects. 
 
 
Keywords: Behavioural Finance; Bitcoin; Cryptocurrencies; Herding; Momentum; 
Sentiment 
JEL classification: G4; G1
 
1 Aston Business School, Aston University, Birmingham, UK. 
2 Essex Business School, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex, UK. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

2 
 
 
1. Introduction 
“It doesn’t do anything. It just sits there. It’s like a seashell or something, and that is 
not an investment to me” 
Warren Buffett 
Over the course of the past decade, following the creation of Bitcoin – the first 
cryptocurrency – there has been a proliferation of new cryptocurrencie s (10,000+), 
attracting both investor’s attention and capital. As of 13 November 2021, the total 
capitalization of the cryptocurrency markets stands well above 2.5 trillion dollars. Hence, it 
is ostensible that the cryptocurrency market has exhibited a sig nificant increase both in its 
intensive, as well as its extensive margins (Ballis and Drakos, 2021). To a layman, the 
cryptocurrency market may be synonymous only to high returns and extreme volatility, 
however this has proved to be a holistic approach lea ding to erroneous conclusions 
regarding the dynamics pertinent to the cryptocurrency market. 
The objective of this study is to offer a systematic review of the empirical literature 
on behavioural finance and cryptocurrencies, by discussing questions examin ed and main 
findings, and providing some avenues for future research. Our survey paper complements 
recent papers in the area by offering a systematic account on the influence of behavioural 
factors on cryptocurrencies (see Corbet et al., 2019). Further, th is study’s purpose is not 
just to index the relevant literature, but rather to showcase and pinpoint several research

behavioural 
factors on cryptocurrencies (see Corbet et al., 2019). Further, th is study’s purpose is not 
just to index the relevant literature, but rather to showcase and pinpoint several research 
areas that have emerged in the field of behavioural cryptocurrency research. For all these 
reasons, a systematic literature review of cryp tocurrencies in behavioural finance seems to 
be timely and particularly important. 
Even though a chronological review of the literature might demonstrate historical 
developments in the area of cryptocurrencies, studies on the behavioural aspects of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

3 
 
cryptocurrencies include a wide range of issues. As a result, the research in this study is 
arranged both topically and chronologically in order to present a more comprehensive 
picture. Instead, we focus on four different aspects of behavioural finance: herding 
behaviour, momentum and overreaction effects, contagion effects, investor sentiment and 
uncertainty, and biases in investment decision making. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 offers an extent review 
on the issue of herding beh aviour among cryptocurrencies. We continue the literature 
review with section 3 which describes the presence of momentum effects and overreaction 
in the cryptocurrency market, and in section 4 we review and discuss studies related to the 
contagion effect. Afterwards, section 5 deals with the issue of sentiment (investor’s, 
market’s) and uncertainty, along with search volume predictability. In section 6, we 
discuss studies that explore investment decision making, optimism bias, disposition, lottery 
and size effect. Finally, Section 7 concludes and indicates niches for potential research. 
 
2. Herding in cryptocurrencies 
Herding behaviour, as a notion, has been examined by various academic 
disciplines, ranging from biology and psychology to economics and finance. In humans, 
herding is described as a coordinated social activity caused by local contacts between a 
group of individuals and characterised by the lack of a central control mechanism.

cs and finance. In humans, 
herding is described as a coordinated social activity caused by local contacts between a 
group of individuals and characterised by the lack of a central control mechanism. Despite 
the absence of centralised coordination, the herd's stru cture is sustained as a result of 
emergent local interactions (Raafat et al. , 2009). Bertrand Russell (1950) stated that, 
“Neither a man nor a crowd nor a nation can be trusted to act humanely or to think sanely 
under the influence of a great fear ”. Many definitions of herding have been presented in 
the context of economics and finance. Herding, in a wide sense, is the same behavioural 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

4 
 
pattern used by economic agents collectively and simultaneously as a result of their 
copying behaviour. 
Stocks and other co mmodities are always exchanged at their fair values, according 
to the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) scenarios. However, it is not rare for capital 
markets to go afoul of the EMH's rationality assumptions in various cases. According to 
the findings of Bikchandani and Sharma (2001), herding behaviour describes a group of 
people acting impulsively and mimicking others' actions without regard for their own 
opinions. As previously stated, herding behaviour is a well -known concept that has been 
studied in a v ariety of domains, among which is the examination over its attributes in the 
cryptocurrency market. 
Table 1 describes all the related studies discussed in this section. Furthermore, we 
split the literature into three sub -categories. In section 2.1 we discu ss studies that suggest 
the presence of herding behaviour among cryptocurrencies (Table 1, Panel A), whereas in 
section 2.2 we include the ones that suggest otherwise or are inconclusive (Table 1, Panel 
B). Finally, in section 2.3 we include the strand of the literature concerning 
herding behaviour among cryptocurrencies during the COVID -19 pandemic (Table 1, 
Panel C). 
***Table 1*** 
 
2.1 Strong and moderate herding effects 
Bouri et al. (2019) investigate the presence of herding behaviour in the 
cryptocurrency market.

the COVID -19 pandemic (Table 1, 
Panel C). 
***Table 1*** 
 
2.1 Strong and moderate herding effects 
Bouri et al. (2019) investigate the presence of herding behaviour in the 
cryptocurrency market. The authors perform a rolling -window study, and the findings 
indicate that there is considerable herding behaviour that fluctuates over 
time. Additionally, by using a logistic regression, they find that herding tends to occur as 
uncertainty increases. Da Gama Silva et al. (2019) analysed herding behaviour and 
contagion phenomena in the cryptocurrency market. For the purposes of their research 50 
of the most liquid and capitalized cryptocurrencies were selected, and by employing the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

5 
 
cross-sectional absolute deviation (CSAD) and cross -sectional standard deviation (CSSD) 
tests, their results revealed herding behaviour, demonstrating extreme periods of adverse 
herd behaviour. Building up on that Vidal-Tomás et al. (2019) observed in their analysis of 
65 digital currencies, that the smallest cryptocurrencies are herding with the largest 
ones, whereas the results of Kallinterakis and Wang (2019) suggest that, besides herding 
and asymmetry (stronger during up -markets), the cryp tocurrency market entails strong 
destabilizing potential, the latter being of particular relevance to the authorities entrusted 
with its regulatory treatment. Similarly, the analysis of Ballis and Drakos (2020) provide 
evidence that the up -events market di spersion follows market movements at a faster pace 
compared to the down events. 
Continuing with the relevant literature, the study of Kumar (2020) finds that 
herding is pronounced when the market is either passing through stress or has become 
highly volatile. Furthermore, the author states that anti-herding is found in a less volatile 
market or in a bullish market. Similarly, Kyriazis (2020) empirically investigates herding 
behaviour among 240 cryptocurrencies during bull and bear markets. The empirical 
estimations of the study reveal that herding behaviour is evident only in bull markets. In 
their research, Jalal et al. (2020), look into herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies in a 
variety of scenarios.

mations of the study reveal that herding behaviour is evident only in bull markets. In 
their research, Jalal et al. (2020), look into herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies in a 
variety of scenarios. The presence of herding is confirmed in cryptocurrencies in the upper 
quantiles during bullish and high volatility times due to investor overexcitement, which 
leads to large volume trading. However, their study suggests no evidence of an intra -
dependency impact between cryptocurrencies and the stock market. Kaiser and Stöckl 
(2020) introduce the concept of beta herding to the debate of herding, providing further 
robustness to their results. T hey also suggest Bitcoin as a ‘transfer currency,’ and show 
experimentally that herding measures focused on such a transfer currency give a more 
exact depiction of dispersion in investors’ opinions on the cryptocurrency market. By 
managing to extract herdi ng tendencies based on the cross -sectional dispersion of 
individual stock betas, Júnior et al. (2020), demonstrate that regardless of market 
conditions, herding toward the market exhibits substantial movement and persistence. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

6 
 
Price dynamics of cryptocurren cies are influenced by the interaction between 
behavioural factors behind investor decisions and publicly accessible data 
flows Gurdgiev and O’Loughlin (2020). Their results show that investor sentiment can 
predict the price direction of cryptocurrencies, indicating direct impact of herding and 
anchoring biases. Furthermore, with their analysis they introduce a new paradigm 
for analysing behavioural drivers of the cryptocurrency assets based on the use of natural 
language AI to extract better quality data o n investor sentiment. On a similar aspect of the 
literature on herding Haryanto et al. (2020) using trade round -trip and survival analysis, 
show that the cryptocurrency market exhibits a reverse disposition effect in bullish periods 
and the usual positive disposition effect in bearish periods. King and Koutmos (2021) 
examines the extent to which herding, and feedback trading behaviours drive price 
dynamics across nine major cryptocurrencies, documenting heterogeneity in the types of 
feedback trading strategies investors utilize across markets. The results indicate that some 
cryptocurrency markets show evidence of herding, agreeing essentially with the views of 
previous similar studies and offering an updated view on the issue. In their study Omane-
Adjepong et al. (2021) examine herding in the most liquid cryptocurrency markets relative 
to traditional financial markets of 10 emerging economies within the G20.

on the issue. In their study Omane-
Adjepong et al. (2021) examine herding in the most liquid cryptocurrency markets relative 
to traditional financial markets of 10 emerging economies within the G20. Their results 
reference significant symmetric crowd and imitation trading, which are dependent on time . 
Additionally, they report asymmetric herd behaviour in the cryptocurrency and stock 
markets, indicative that traders of these markets react collectively to extreme return 
movement with implied high risk and consequences for market informational efficienc y. 
Manahov (2021) utilising millisecond data for five major cryptocurrencies, and two 
cryptocurrency indices [Crypto Index (CRIX) and CCI30 Crypto Currencies Index], 
investigates the relationship between cryptocurrency liquidity, herding behaviour and 
profitability during periods of extreme price movements (EPMs). The results of the 
study demonstrate that cryptocurrency traders facilitate EPMs and demand liquidity even 
during the utmost EPMs, observing the presence of herding behaviour during up markets 
across the entire dataset. Ren and Lucey (2022) investigate herding behaviour among two 
types of cryptocurrencies based on their energy usage (“black/dirty” and “green/clean”). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

7 
 
Their results show that herding is present only in the “black/dirty” market and is even more 
pronounced during periods of down markets. Furthermore, they show that “green/clean” 
cryptocurrencies herd with “black/dirty” cryptocurrencies when both markets are positive. 
Choi et al. (2022) using hourly data for eight major cryptocurrenc ies investigated the 
presence of herding, finding anti -herding behaviour at shorter time intervals and herding 
during longer periods, with the phenomenon being even stronger in the latter during down 
markets. In their study Raimundo Júnior et al. (2022) reveal that herding toward the market 
shows significant movement, and persistence regardless of the market condition. Finally, 
Blasco et al. (2022) analyse herding behaviour among exchanges around the expiration of 
Bitcoin futures traded on the Chicago Merca ntile Exchange (CME), finding that herding 
appears to be significant during the week before expiration. 
 
2.2 No Herding 
 Panel B of Table 1 showcases the studies whose empirical findings indicate that 
herding is not present among cryptocurrencies, or its effect is not clearly pronounced. On 
that note, the analysis of Kurt Gümüş et al. (2019) focuses on the cryptocurrency index and 
cryptocurrencies, which have existed since the arbitrarily set starting date of the CCI 30 
Index. The results of the study indicate no evidence of herding behaviour in the 
cryptocurrency market in both CSSD and CSAD approaches.

existed since the arbitrarily set starting date of the CCI 30 
Index. The results of the study indicate no evidence of herding behaviour in the 
cryptocurrency market in both CSSD and CSAD approaches. Furthermore, Coskun et al. 
(2020), studied the impact of economic policy uncertainty on herding behaviour in addition 
to the CSAD approach. Using daily data from the 14 most popular cryptocurrencies, the 
findings for the entire sample point to anti -herding behaviour. Additionally, during the ‘up 
and down’ market phases, there was no notable asymmetric behaviour. Building up on 
previous research Amirat and Alwafi (2020), utilised data from 20 major cryptocurrencies 
and MV Index Solution Crypto Compare Digital Assets for large cap index. The authors 
state that no indication of herding tendency was present in the results when using the cross-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

8 
 
sectional absolute standard deviation method. However, by utilising a rolling window 
approach, the data reveal considerable herding behaviour that fluctuates across time. 
Finally, the study discovers an inverse link between herding behaviour and the B loomberg 
consumer comfort index, implying that when traders feel uneasy, they prefer to ignore their 
expectations and focus on market performance. 
 
2.3 Herding in cryptocurrencies during the pandemic 
 The recent COVID-19 pandemic, as a textbook case of an exogenous shock, posed 
the question of whether herding behaviour is present in the cryptocurrency market mid the 
COVID-19 pandemic. One of the f irst papers examining herding behaviour during 
COVID-19 is that of Mnif et al. (2020), who, using the fractal th eory and analysing daily 
returns of five cryptocurrencies, find that all, except for Bitcoin, become more efficient in 
the post -COVID-19 period; that is, less herding behaviour exists after the pandemic. In 
addition, Yarovaya et al. (2021) examining the mo st traded cryptocurrency markets, find 
that although the COVID -19 pandemic increased the volatility in cryptocurrency markets, 
it does not seem to cause stronger herding in these markets. 
 On the other hand, the analysis of Susana et al. (2020) revealed that herding was 
present among all cryptocurrencies of the sample in normal conditions, but not during 
market upswing or downswing. Mandaci and Cagli (202 2), employing a novel Granger

0) revealed that herding was 
present among all cryptocurrencies of the sample in normal conditions, but not during 
market upswing or downswing. Mandaci and Cagli (202 2), employing a novel Granger 
causality methodology with a Fourier approximation, fin d significant herding behaviour 
during the COVID -19 outbreak, while Lee et al. (2021) and Shrotryia and Kalra (2021), 
find that herding effect is present, only during down markets in periods of high volatility 
and up markets in periods of low volatility, a nd during normal, bullish and high volatility 
periods accordingly. Finally, in their study, Rubbaniy et al. (2021), utilise over 100 
cryptocurrencies in order to investigate the phenomenon. Their empirical results reveal the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

9 
 
presence if herding behaviour d uring extreme market conditions, with significant herding 
being found during COVID-19 post-lockdowns periods. 
 
3. Momentum and Overreaction/Reversal 
 Among the most classical historical anomalies being present on relatively 
‘immature’ markets, momentum and contrarian effects stand out. In this section, we 
discuss the popular momentum strategy as implemented in the cryptocurrency market. 
Furthermore, we document the issues of reversal and overreaction as documented in the 
relevant literature. Table 2 presents the set of studies that investigate the above -mentioned 
topics. On the issue of overreaction, Chevapatrakul and Mascia (2019) examined for the 
very first time the persistence of returns on Bitcoin at different parts on the return 
distributions through the use of the quantile autoregressive (QAR) models. According to 
the authors, lower quantiles of the daily return distribution and upper quantiles of t he 
weekly return distribution show positive correlation with historical returns, indicating 
overreaction in the Bitcoin market. In their study, Kosc et al. (2019) report the results of 
investigation of the momentum and contrarian effects on cryptocurrency markets, with the 
investigated investment strategies involving 100 cryptocurrencies with the largest market 
cap. Their empirical results show a clear and significant dominance of the short -term

y markets, with the 
investigated investment strategies involving 100 cryptocurrencies with the largest market 
cap. Their empirical results show a clear and significant dominance of the short -term 
contrarian effect over both momentum effect and the benchmark portfolios, along with a 
significant diversification potential for all cryptocurrency portfolios with relation to the 
S&P500 index. Similarly, the findings of Begušić and Kostanjčar (2019) show a 
substantial momentum impact in the most liquid cryptocurrencies, corroborating investor 
herding hypotheses. Furthermore, the authors suggest two advantageous long -only 
strategies: illiquid lo sers and liquid winners, both of which outperform the market 
capitalization weighted portfolio in terms of risk adjusted performance. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

10 
 
**** Table 2 **** 
Caporale and Plastun (2020), extending their analysis (Caporale and Plastun, 2019), 
investigate if there is a momentum impact in the cryptocurrency market after one -day 
anomalous returns. The findings of their study show that hourly returns on 
positive/negative anomalous returns during the day are considerably higher/lower than on a 
typical positive/negative day. Liu et al. (2020), investigating a collection of 78 
cryptocurrencies, identify three common risk factors in the returns on cryptocurrencies, 
which are related to cryptocurrency market return, market capitalization (size) and 
momentum of cryptocurrenc ies. The authors find that there are anomalous returns that 
decrease with size and increase with return momentum, and the momentum effect is more 
significant in small cryptocurrencies. Chu et al. (2020) with their findings indicate that the 
momentum method has the potential to be utilised successfully for bitcoin trading at a high 
frequency, while the study of Borgards (2021) compares the momentum impact of twenty 
cryptocurrencies to the stock market in the United States and finds evidence that high 
percentage of asset classes' creation phases are followed by momentum periods, indicating 
that the momentum effect is robust. It also identifies important price levels during 
structural components of the momentum period, when volatility spikes quickly but 
intensely, resulting in a price impulse in the momentum's direction.

It also identifies important price levels during 
structural components of the momentum period, when volatility spikes quickly but 
intensely, resulting in a price impulse in the momentum's direction. Additionally, Jia et al. 
(2022) introduce and test a three -factor pricing model including market, size, and 
momentum factors, outperforming relevant models suggested in the literature. On the other 
hand, Grobys and Sapkota (2019) retrieving a set of 143 cryptocurrencies. However, their 
findings, in contrary to earlier studies, do not indicate any evidence of significant 
momentum payoffs, supporting the view that the cryptocurrency market is far m ore 
efficient than suggested. Finally, Wen et al. (2022), utilising high -frequency data, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

11 
 
showcase evidence of intraday return predictability, consisting of both intraday momentum 
and reversal, in the cryptocurrency market. 
 
4. Bubbles and Contagion Effects in cryptocurrency markets 
 In this section we discuss the presence of contagion effect in the cryptocurrency 
market. Table 3 summarises the set of papers discussed in this section. The investigation of 
such a phenomenon is important to un derstand in the hope that it can better explain 
cryptocurrencies’ price volatility. Matkovskyy and Jalan (2019) in their analysis studied 
contagion effects between traditional financial markets, represented by five equity indices 
and the EUR, USD, GBP, and JPY centralized Bitcoin markets. The empirical results 
showcase significant contagion effects from financial to Bitcoin markets in terms of both 
correlation and co-skewness of market returns. Furthermore, the findings also indicate that 
during crisis peri ods, risk-averse investors exhibit the tendency to move away from risky 
cryptocurrency markets towards safer financial markets. Li et al. (2021) find that pump-
and-dump schemes lead to short -term bubbles featuring dramatic increases in prices, 
volume, and volatility. Using a difference -in-differences approach, they provide causal 
evidence that pump-and-dump schemes are detrimental to the liquidity and price of 
cryptocurrencies. The paper of Gronwald (2021) revisits the issue of price explosiveness in

h, they provide causal 
evidence that pump-and-dump schemes are detrimental to the liquidity and price of 
cryptocurrencies. The paper of Gronwald (2021) revisits the issue of price explosiveness in 
cryptocurrency markets (see also Bouri et al., 2018), showing that there is strong evidence 
of explosive periods in cryptocurrency prices, suggesting however, the term bubble should 
be used with more caution, since the interpretation of these explosive periods a s 
cryptocurrency bubbles requires a sufficient understanding of the fundamental value of 
cryptocurrencies. Corbet et al. (2022), using a regime -switching skew -normal (RSSN) 
methodology, investigated the presence of financial contagion among several important 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

12 
 
Chinese stock indices during the COVID -19 pandemic, with their results showcasing 
contagion effects. 
**** Table 3 **** 
 
5. Sentiment and Uncertainty effects 
Barberis and Thaler (2003) stated that “behavioural finance has two building 
blocks: limits to arbitrage, which argues that it can be difficult for rational traders to undo 
the dislocations caused by less rational tr aders; and psychology, which catalogues the 
kinds of deviations from full rationality we might expect to see ”. Since Keynes (1936) 
there has been an increasing attention in the identification on the role that sentiment has in 
the decision-making process of investors in financial markets. Barberis et al. (1998) have 
identified investor sentiment as how investors form their beliefs. Therefore, sentiment in its 
principle is a qualitative individual’s characteristic stemming from the interconnection 
among numerous factors, thus making it extremely difficult to identify it. For that reason, 
various studies have taken various approaches in order to properly understand, measure 
and ‘quantify’ it (Brown and Cliff, 2004; Corredor et al., 2013; Sibley et al., 2016). Table 
4 presents the set of papers discussed in this section. 
**** Table 4 **** 
5.1 Investor Sentiment (Attention) 
 In the field of cryptocurrencies now, in their study, Chen et al. (2019) suggest a 
cryptocurrency-specific lexicon that may be used to assess investor emotion and forecast 
cryptocurrency market returns.

he field of cryptocurrencies now, in their study, Chen et al. (2019) suggest a 
cryptocurrency-specific lexicon that may be used to assess investor emotion and forecast 
cryptocurrency market returns. According to their findings, investor sentiment positively 
predicts excess CRIX returns without significant evidence of return revers al. Furthermore, 
the authors also suggest that in a market dominated by noisy traders, investor mood drives 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

13 
 
price movement and that its influence is unlikely to change in the near future. Naeem et al. 
(2021) examined the predictive ability of online invest or sentiment for six major 
cryptocurrency returns, using two proxies, the FEARS index of Da et al. (2015) and 
Twitter Happiness sentiment. Overall, based on their findings, happiness sentiment reveals 
to be a persistent and robust predictor for most crypto currency returns, with FEARS index 
also showing significant predictability of returns, essentially providing evidence that online 
investor sentiment is a significant nonlinear predictor for most major cryptocurrencies 
returns. Li et al. (2021) in their pap er investigate the relationship between investor 
attention and the major cryptocurrency markets by wavelet -based quantile Granger 
causality, with the wavelet analysis illustrating the interdependence between investor 
attention and the cryptocurrency return s. Specifically, investor attention has a relatively 
stronger impact on the cryptocurrency returns in bearish markets than that in bullish 
markets in the short term. Finally, AlNemer et al. (2021) dive into examining the 
relationship between investor sentiment and cryptocurrency prices . For their purpose they 
utilise both bivariate and multivariate wavelet techniques in order to look into the investor 
sentiment nexus to inter -cryptocurrency pricing. The ir empirical findings reveal that the

rpose they 
utilise both bivariate and multivariate wavelet techniques in order to look into the investor 
sentiment nexus to inter -cryptocurrency pricing. The ir empirical findings reveal that the 
Sentix Investor Confidence index is useful in understanding the long-term fluctuations of 
Bitcoin and Litecoin values. The analysis also shows that Bitcoin prices have a time -
dependent link with other cryptocurrencies and the Sentix Investor Confidence index, 
which was most noticeable during the Bitcoin bubble. 
 
5.2 Market/Public Sentiment 
Garcia and Schweitzer (2015) present a consistent method to the creation of 
algorithmic traders that incorporates multiple data sources, such as economic indications of 
volume and price of exchange for USD, adoption of Bitcoin technology, and Bitcoin 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

14 
 
transaction volume. According to the findings of their analysis , rising Bitcoin prices are 
preceded by growing opinion polarisation and exchange volume, while rising emotional 
valence is preceded by rising opinion polarisation and exchange volume. The study of 
Demir et al. (2018) examines the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) index's predictive 
power on daily Bitcoin returns, demonstrating that the EPU ha s predictive power on 
Bitcoin returns. The research reveals that Bitcoin returns are essentially inversely related to 
the EPU. However, for both the lower and higher quantiles of Bitcoin returns and the EPU, 
the effect is positive and substantial. Advancing the level of understanding on 
cryptocurrencies and public sentiment Ayvaz and Shiha (2018) used lexicon -based 
sentiment analysis techniques to explore the relationship between public sentiments on 
social media regarding cryptocurrencies and price fluctua tions, with the objective of 
determining the feasibility of forecasting cryptocurrency values. Their findings show that 
utilising lexicon-based sentiment analysis approaches to forecast Bitcoin price fluctuations 
is unreliable. The research of Gurdgiev et al. (2019) focuses on how sentiment analysis 
may be used to estimate the impacts of four distinct types of attitudes toward 
cryptocurrency marketplaces in order to forecast price movement, while Baig et al. (2019)

s on how sentiment analysis 
may be used to estimate the impacts of four distinct types of attitudes toward 
cryptocurrency marketplaces in order to forecast price movement, while Baig et al. (2019) 
seek to explain the unusual level of Bitcoin price clustering using various measures of 
Bitcoin-level and market -wide sentiment, with their empirical results suggesting that 
sentiment has a strong positive association with price clustering. Anastasiou et al. (2021) 
examine the effect of crisis sentiment on cryptocurrencies’ price crash risk utilising the 
FEARS index . The authors showed that cryptocurrencies’ price crash risk is positively 
related to the FEARS index, indicating that a higher crisis s entiment by investors increases 
cryptocurrencies’ price crash risk , and t heir findings advanc ing the understanding of the 
consequences of sentiment on the cryptocurrency market. Finally, Anamika and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

15 
 
Subramaniam (2022) examine the influence of investor sentiment based on news headlines, 
finding that indeed there is a significant impact in cryptocurrency returns. 
 
5.3 Search Volume Predictability 
During the past decade, there has been an emphasis on the utility of search volume 
data in finance and the increasingly usefulness of such a proxy for the definition of both 
economic and non-economic variables. Google search data make it possible to direct ly and 
objectively reveal an individual’s sentiments. According to statcounter.com, by July 2020, 
it accounted for 92.17% worldwide. One of the first empirical studies, introducing Google 
search data, is the analysis by Ginsberg et al. (2009) who used rele vant data to predict 
influenza epidemics before their official listing. In the field of economics, Da et al. (2011) 
proposed in their analysis the use of search volume data in order to measure an investors’ 
attention, Choi and Varian (2012) attempted to predict claims for unemployment benefits 
by utilizing Google search data, Bank et al. (2011) showed that Google search volume not 
only serves as an intuitive proxy for overall firm recognition, but also captures the 
attention of stock market investors and Takeda and Wakao (2014) studied the relationship 
between the stock-trading volume of Japanese stocks and Google search intensity. 
Moving now closer to our work and to the cryptocurrency related literature,

d Wakao (2014) studied the relationship 
between the stock-trading volume of Japanese stocks and Google search intensity. 
Moving now closer to our work and to the cryptocurrency related literature, 
Kristoufek (2013) in his study analysed the connection between Google search, Wikipedia 
and Bitcoin price data, finding that increased interest in Bitcoin lead s to higher prices, 
which subsequently results back into even higher search volume. Similarly, Garcia et al. 
(2014) identify two feedback loops, one driven by word of mouth, and the other by new 
Bitcoin adopters, that lead public interest towards price bub bles. As they state in their 
analysis both these loops suggest that individual investors satisfy their information demand 
using Google or Wikipedia which then leads to trading activity in Bitcoin. However, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

16 
 
Garcia and Schweitzer (2015), in their related stu dy, contradict the results of Kristoufek 
(2013) stating that the search volume variable carries no information which is useful as a 
trading signal. Additionally, Urquhart (2018) examines the connection among Google 
search data and Bitcoin returns/volume, f inding that searches do not seem to serve as a 
suitable volatility predictor. Two other worth mentioning studies are these of Panagiotidis 
et al. (2019) and Bleher and Dimplf (2019). Specifically, Panagiotidis et al. (2019) showed 
evidence that gold and se arch intensity are the most important drivers of Bitcoin returns, 
while Bleher and Dimplf (2019) evaluated the usefulness of Google search data in 
predicting returns and volatility of cryptocurrencies. Their results, being in line with the 
relevant literat ure on financial markets, indicate that returns are not predictable while 
volatility is predictable to some extent. Finally, Guégan and Renault (2021) use a dataset of 
approximately one million messages sent on StockTwits to explore the relationship 
between investor sentiment on social media and intraday Bitcoin returns. They find a 
statistically significant relationship between investor sentiment and Bitcoin returns for 
frequencies of up to 15 minutes. 
 
6. Investment Decision-Making 
In this section we discuss the related studies dealing with the impact of behavioural

n investor sentiment and Bitcoin returns for 
frequencies of up to 15 minutes. 
 
6. Investment Decision-Making 
In this section we discuss the related studies dealing with the impact of behavioural 
finance elements on cryptocurrency investment decisions, optimism bias, disposition, 
lottery and size effect. Table 5 presents the set of studies that investigate the above -
mentioned topics . Zhang et al. (2019), investigate whether Chinese cryptocurrency 
investors show confirmatory bias when processing authority -related news. By using data 
from the largest cryptocurrency exchange in China, the study finds that investors’ response 
to authority -related news is negative and statistically significant. Moreover, the authors 
find that the abnormal trading volume and standard deviation of abnormal trading volume 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

17 
 
are significantly higher for authority -related news with higher readability, suggesting 
investors respond to the more readable authority-related news with more trading behaviour. 
Al-Mansour (2020) investigates t he impact of behavioural finance elements on 
cryptocurrency investment decisions, focusing on Arab investors who participate in the 
cryptocurrency market. A quantitative technique was utilised, with 112 questionnaires sent 
using a snowball sample method. The findings of the study demonstrate that herding 
theory, prospect theory, and heuristic theory have a substantial impact on investors ’ 
Bitcoin investing decisions. Finally, Luo et al. (2021) introduce a behavioural channel to 
argue that the degree of ambiguity aversion is a prominent source of abnormal returns from 
investment in Bitcoin markets. Using data over a ten -year period, they show that Bitcoin 
investors exhibit, on average, an increasing aversion to ambiguity. Furthermore, investors 
are found to earn abnormal returns only when ambiguity is low. 
**** Table 5 **** 
6.1 Optimism bias 
On the issue of optimism bias, Caferra (2020) investigates the link between news -
driven feelings an d behaviour convergence in the cryptocurrency market. The results 
showcase that the peaks and falls of optimism determine returns variability using both 
cross-sectional standard (CSSD) and absolute (CSAD) deviation. Indeed, the research

rency market. The results 
showcase that the peaks and falls of optimism determine returns variability using both 
cross-sectional standard (CSSD) and absolute (CSAD) deviation. Indeed, the research 
further shows that an increase in news positivity is related with a reduced returns 
dispersion, demonstrating investor convergence. The study of Hidajat (2019) tried to fill 
the research gap on cryptocurrencies from the behavioural perspective. It offers a 
conceptual model f or understanding the behavioural bias (i.e., optimism, overconfidence) 
being present when investing in cryptocurrencies. The study ultimately implies that prices 
and Bitcoin transactions are more determined by psychological factors. Building up on that 
Aloosh and Ouzan (2020) use behavioural economics to examine the dynamics of Bitcoin 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

18 
 
pricing. Participants in the cryptocurrency market appear to be acting irrationally. The 
study shows that the cryptocurrency market has a significant small price bias, which 
supports the idea that investors respond to news differently depending on the price level. 
Ultimately, the authors showcase that low-priced cryptocurrencies are much more volatile 
than their high-priced counterparts. 
 
6.2 Disposition effect 
The research paper of Castro (2019) aims to study irrational behavio ur with a focus 
on the disposition effect in stocks and Bitcoin . The results of the study’s investigation 
show that although indeed there is disposition effect in Bitcoin, it is proven to be much 
stronger for stocks. Cao and Rhue (2019) in their analysis ask whether the presence and 
news sentiment from prestigious business journals would affect the Bitcoin return. Using a 
bag-of-words model and a dictionary -based approach, they calculate th e sentiment 
embedded in the news headlines , and estimate a regression of financial news sentiment on 
Bitcoin daily return. They find that positive sentiment contributes significantly negatively 
to Bitcoin return on the same day (negative sentiment day cont ributes positively, although 
not significantly). Authors state that these findings extend the understanding of disposition 
effect to the cryptocurrency market . Haryanto et al. (2020) investigate the disposition 
effect using the Mt. Gox data between 2011 –2013.

that these findings extend the understanding of disposition 
effect to the cryptocurrency market . Haryanto et al. (2020) investigate the disposition 
effect using the Mt. Gox data between 2011 –2013. Using trade round -trip and survival 
analysis, the analysis reveals that the cryptocurrency market exhibits a reverse disposition 
effect in bullish periods and the usual positive disposition effect in bearish periods. In their 
paper Schatzmann and Haslhofer (2020) expand on existing research and empirically 
investigate the prevalence of the disposition effect in Bitcoin. Their results show that 
investors are indeed subject to the disposition effect, tending to sell their winning posit ions 
too soon and holding on to their losing position for too long. As stated in their analysis, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

19 
 
this effect is very prominently evident from the boom-and-bust year 2017 onwards, 
confirmed via most of the applied technical indicators. 
 
6.3 Lottery effects 
Grobys and Junttila (2021) explore lottery-like demand in cryptocurrency markets. 
Their results suggest that parallel to stock markets, similar behavio ural mechanisms of 
underlying investor behavio ur are present also in new virtual currency markets. Lin et al. 
(2021) construct the lottery -like portfolio based on the maximum return. Their results 
showcase a lottery -like momentum, meaning that a higher maximum return leads to a 
higher future return among 64 cryptocurrencies. The analysis of Li et al. (2021) studies the 
MAX effect in t he cryptocurrency due to its lottery -like features (i.e., large positive 
skewness). Contrary to findings in other markets, this study demonstrates that 
cryptocurrencies with higher maximum daily returns tend to achieve higher returns in the 
future and call this the “MAX momentum” effect. Furthermore, the authors showcase that 
a variation exists in the magnitude of the MAX momentum effect depending o n market 
conditions, investor sentiment and the under-pricing of cryptocurrencies. Finally, Ozdamar 
et al. (2021) provide evidence for a positive and statistically significant relationship 
between the maximum daily return within the previous month (MAX) an d the expected 
returns on cryptocurrencies. Their univariate portfolio analysis shows that weekly average

gnificant relationship 
between the maximum daily return within the previous month (MAX) an d the expected 
returns on cryptocurrencies. Their univariate portfolio analysis shows that weekly average 
raw and risk -adjusted return differences between portfolios of cryptocurrencies with the 
highest and lowest MAX deciles are 3.03% and 1.99%, respectiv ely, with the results being 
robust with respect to the differences in size, price, momentum, short -term reversal, 
liquidity, volatility, skewness, and investor sentiment. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

20 
 
6.4 Size effects 
Ultimately, Li et al. (2020) examine the size eﬀect in the cryptocurrency market with 
a sample of more than 1800 cryptocurrencies. The authors of this research ﬁnd that 
cryptocurrencies with small market value tend to perform better in the future, which 
challenges the Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis. The size eﬀect is found to be stable over the 
sample period and robust to the sample size. 
 
7. Conclusions 
In the past decade, cryptocurrencies have emerged as new asset class, gathering 
both investors’ funds and the attention of the academic community. As a result , the 
literature on cryptocurrencies and issues apt to behavioural finance has been consistently 
growing, moving in tandem with the increasing market capitalisation and trading volumes 
of the cryptocurrency market. This paper offers a comprehensive review of the rel ated 
literature, highlighting the main empirical findings regarding herding behaviour among 
cryptocurrencies, momentum effects and overreaction, contagion effect, sentiment 
(investor’s, market’s) and uncertainty, along with studies related to investment de cision 
making, optimism bias, disposition, lottery and size effect. 
Innovative financial assets like cryptocurrencies, represent a big challenge for the 
area of behavioural finance and financial economics in general, since there are 
fundamental elements of difference both on the manner of how this market operates, but 
also on the ‘architecture’ of cryptocurrencies.

ral finance and financial economics in general, since there are 
fundamental elements of difference both on the manner of how this market operates, but 
also on the ‘architecture’ of cryptocurrencies. For example, when compared to traditional 
markets, in the cryptocurrency market there exists a total lack of an ‘anchor’ in terms of 
linkage to some real tangible value. So, identifying the factors and properties that define 
these innovative assets will be of utmost importance. Therefore, in terms of potential future 
research, the need for taking into account the technical elements of cryptocurren cies (i.e., 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

21 
 
cryptocurrency/blockchain design) will become more and more pronounced. In addition, 
the use of high -frequency data could potentially help answering questions that are still 
debated among academics. Finally, future studies on the behavioural as pects of the 
cryptocurrency market could concentrate on further exploring the possible interrelationship 
between cryptocurrencies and traditional financial markets. 
 
References 
Al-Mansour, B.Y., 2020. Cryptocurrency Market: Behavioral Finance Perspective. The Journal of 
Asian Finance, Economics and Business 7, 159–168. 
AlNemer, H.A., Hkiri, B., Khan, M.A., 2021. Time -Varying Nexus between Investor Sentiment 
and Cryptocurrency Market: New Insights from a Wavelet Coherence Framework. Journal 
of Risk and Financial Management 14, 275. 
Aloosh, A., Ouzan, S., 2020. The psychology of cryptocurrency prices. Finance Research Letters 
33, 101192. 
Amirat, A., Alwafi, W., 2020. Does herding behavior exist in cryptocurrency market? Cogent 
Economics & Finance 8, 1735680. 
Anamika, A., Subramaniam, S., 2022. Do news headlines matter in the cryptocurrency market? 
Applied Economics 0, 1–17. 
Anastasiou, D., Ballis, A., Drakos, K., 2021. Cryptocurrencies’ Price Crash Risk and Crisis 
Sentiment. Finance Research Letters 101928. 
Ayvaz, S., Shiha, M.O., 2018. A Scalable Streaming Big Data Architecture for Real -Time 
Sentiment Analysis, in: Proceedings of the 2018 2nd International Conference on Cloud

search Letters 101928. 
Ayvaz, S., Shiha, M.O., 2018. A Scalable Streaming Big Data Architecture for Real -Time 
Sentiment Analysis, in: Proceedings of the 2018 2nd International Conference on Cloud 
and Big Data Computing, ICCBDC’18. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 47–51. 
Ballis, A., Drakos, K., 2020. Testing for herding in the cryptocurrency market. Finance Res. Lett. 
33, 101210. 
Ballis, A., Drakos, K., 2021. The Explosion in Cryptocurrencies: A Black Hole Analogy. 
Financial Innovation 7, 8. 
Baig, A., Blau, B.M., Sabah, N., 2019. Price clustering and sentiment in bitcoin. Finance Research 
Letters 29, 111–116. 
Bank, M., Larch, M., & Peter, G., 2011. Google search volume and its influence on liquidity and 
returns. Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, 25(3), 239–264. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

22 
 
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. Journal of financial 
economics, 49(3), 307-343. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-405X(98)00027-0 
Barberis, N., & Thaler, R., 2003. A survey of be havioral finance. Handbook of the Economics of 
Finance 1, 1053-1128. 
Begušić, S., Kostanjčar, Z., 2019. Momentum and liquidity in cryptocurrencies. 
Bikhchandani, S. and Sharma, S., 2001. Herd Behavior in Financial Markets. IMF Staff Papers, 
International Monetary Fund, 47, 279–310. 
Blasco, N., Corredor, P., Satrústegui, N., 2022. The witching week of herding on bitcoin 
exchanges. Financ Innov 8, 26. 
Bleher, J., Dimpfl, T., 2019. Today I got a million, tomorrow, I don’t know: On the predictability 
of cryptocurrencies by means of Google search volume. International Review of Financial 
Analysis 63, 147–159. 
Borgards, O., 2021. Dynamic time series momentum of cryptocurrencies. The North American 
Journal of Economics and Finance 57, 101428. 
Bouri, E., Gupta, R., Roubaud, D., 2019. Herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies. Finance Res. 
Lett. 29, 216-221. 
Bouri, E., Shahzad, S.J.H., Roubaud, D., 2019. Co -explosivity in the cryptocurrency market. 
Finance Research Letters 29, 178–183. 
Brown, G.W., Cliff, M.T., 2004. Inve stor sentiment and the near -term stock market. Journal of 
Empirical Finance 11, 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2002.12.001 
Caferra, R., 2020. Good vibes only: The crypto -optimistic behavior.

r sentiment and the near -term stock market. Journal of 
Empirical Finance 11, 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2002.12.001 
Caferra, R., 2020. Good vibes only: The crypto -optimistic behavior. Journal of Behavioral and 
Experimental Finance 28, 100407. 
Cao, M., Rhue, L., 2019. Disposed of Bitcoin? Using the Disposition Effect to Understand 
Financial News Sentiment and Bitcoin Returns. AMCIS 2019 Proceedings. 
Caporale, G.M., Plastun, A., 2019. The day of the week effect in the cryptocurrency market. 
Finance Research Letters 31. 
Caporale, G.M., Plastun, A., 2020. Momentum effects in the cryptocurrency market after one -day 
abnormal returns. Financ Mark Portf Manag 34, 251–266. 
Castro, M.A., 2019. The disposition effect in stocks versus bitcoin. 
Chen, C.Y.-H., Guo, L., Renault, T., 2019. What Makes Cryptocurrencies Special? Investor 
Sentiment and Return Predictability (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 3398423). Social 
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY. 
Chevapatrakul, T., Mascia, D.V., 2019. Detecting o verreaction in the Bitcoin market: A quantile 
autoregression approach. Finance Research Letters 30, 371–377. 
Choi, K. -H., Kang, S.H., Yoon, S. -M., 2022. Herding behaviour in Korea’s cryptocurrency 
market. Applied Economics 54, 2795–2809. 
Choi, H., Varian, H., 2012. Predicting the present with Google Trends. Economic Record, 88, 2-9. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

23 
 
Chu, J., Chan, S., Zhang, Y., 2020. High frequency momentum trading with cryptocurrencies. 
Research in International Business and Finance 52, 101176. 
Corbet, S., Hou, Y. (Greg), Hu, Y., Oxley, L., 2022. Financial contagion among COVID -19 
concept-related stocks in China. Applied Economics 54, 2439–2452. 
Corbet, S., Lucey, B. M., Urquhart, A., Yarovaya, L., 2019. Cryptocurrencies as a financial asset: 
a systematic analysis. International Review of Financial Analysis 62, 182-199. 
Corredor, P., Ferrer, E., Santamaria, R., 2013. Investor sentiment effect in stock markets: Stock 
characteristics or country -specific factors? International Review of Economics & Finance 
27, 572–591. 
Coskun, E.A., Lau, C.K.M., Kahyaoglu, H., 2020. Uncertainty and herding behavior: evidence 
from cryptocurrencies. Research in International Business and Finance 54, 101284. 
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P., 2011. In search of attention. The Journal of Finance, 66 (5), 1461-
1499. 
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P., 2015. The sum of all fears investor sentiment and asset prices. 
Review of Financial Studies, 28 (1), 1-32. 
da Gama Silva, P.V.J., Klotzle, M.C., Pinto, A.C.F., Gomes, L.L., 2019. Herding behavior and 
contagion in the cryptocurrency market. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 
22, 41–50. 
Demir, E., Gozgor, G., Lau, C.K.M., Vigne, S.A., 2018. Does economic policy uncertainty predict 
the Bitcoin returns? An empirical investigation. Finance Research Letters 26, 145–149.

nce 
22, 41–50. 
Demir, E., Gozgor, G., Lau, C.K.M., Vigne, S.A., 2018. Does economic policy uncertainty predict 
the Bitcoin returns? An empirical investigation. Finance Research Letters 26, 145–149. 
Garcia, D., Tessone, C.J., Mavrodiev, P., Perony, N., 2014. The digital traces of bubbles: feedback 
cycles between socio -economic signals in the Bitcoin economy. Journal of The Royal 
Society Interface 11, 20140623. 
Garcia, D., & Schweitzer, F., 2015. Social signals and algorithmic trading of Bitcoin. Royal 
Society Open Science, 2(9). 
Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M. H., Patel, R. S., Brammer, L., Smolinski, M. S., Brilliant, L., 2009. 
Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature, 457, 1012–1014. 
Grobys, K., Junttila, J., 2021. Speculation and lottery -like demand in cryptocurrency markets. 
Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 71, 101289. 
Grobys, K., Sapkota, N., 2019. Cryptocurrencies and momentum. Economics Letters 180, 6–10. 
Gronwald, M., 2021. How explosive are cryptocurrency prices? Finance Research Letters 38, 
101603. 
Guégan, D., Renault, T., 2021. Does investor sentiment on social media provide robust 
information for Bitcoin returns predictability? Finance Research Letters 38, 101494. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

24 
 
Gurdgiev, C., O’Loughlin, D., 2020. Herding and anchoring in cryptocurrency markets: Investor 
reaction to fear and uncertainty. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 25, 
100271. 
Gurdgiev, C., O’Loughlin, D., Chlebowski, B., 2019. Behavioral Basis Of Cryptocurrencies 
Markets : Examining Effects Of Public Sentiment, Fear, And Uncertainty On Price 
Formation. Journal of Financial Transformation 49, 110–121. 
Haryanto, S., Subroto, A., Ulpah, M., 2020. Disposition effect and herding behavior in the 
cryptocurrency market. J. Ind. Bus. Econ. 47, 115–132. 
Hidajat, T., 2019. BEHAVIOURAL BIASES IN BITCOIN TRADING. Fokus Ekonomi : Jurnal 
Ilmiah Ekonomi 14, 337–354. 
Jalal, R.N.-U.-D., Sargiacom o, M., Sahar, N.U., Fayyaz, U. -E.-R., 2020. Herding Behavior and 
Cryptocurrency: Market Asymmetries, Inter -Dependency and Intra -Dependency. The 
Journal of Asian Finance, Economics and Business 7, 27–34. 
Jia, B., Goodell, J.W., Shen, D., 202 2. Momentum or r eversal: Which is the appropriate third 
factor for cryptocurrencies? Finance Research Letters 102139. 
Júnior, G. de S.R., Palazzi, R.B., Tavares, R. de S., Klotzle, M.C., 2020. Market Stress and 
Herding: A New Approach to the Cryptocurrency Market. Journal of Behavioral Finance 0, 
1–15. 
Kaiser, L., Stöckl, S., 2020. Cryptocurrencies: Herding and the transfer currency. Finance 
Research Letters 33, 101214. 
Kallinterakis, V., Wang, Y., 2019. Do investors herd in cryptocurrencies – and why? Research in

S., 2020. Cryptocurrencies: Herding and the transfer currency. Finance 
Research Letters 33, 101214. 
Kallinterakis, V., Wang, Y., 2019. Do investors herd in cryptocurrencies – and why? Research in 
International Business and Finance 50, 240–245. 
Keynes, J. M., 1936. The general theory of employment, interest and money. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace. 
King, T., Koutmos, D., 2021. Herding and feedback trading in cryptocurrency markets. Ann Oper 
Res 300, 79–96. 
Kosc, K., Sakowski, P., Ślepaczuk, R., 2019. Momentum and contrarian effects on the 
cryptocurrency market. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 523, 691 –
701. 
Kristoufek, L., 2013. BitCoin meets Google Trends and Wikipedia : Quantifying the re lationship 
between phenomena of the Internet era. Sci Rep 3, 3415. 
Kumar, A., 2020. Empirical investigation of herding in cryptocurrency market under different 
market regimes. Review of Behavioral Finance ahead-of-print. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

25 
 
Kurt Gümüş, G., Gümüş, Y., Çimen, A ., 2019. Herding Behaviour in Cryptocurrency Market: 
CSSD and CSAD Analysis, in: Hacioglu, U. (Ed.), Blockchain Economics and Financial 
Market Innovation: Financial Innovations in the Digital Age, Contributions to Economics. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 103–114. 
Kyriazis, N.A., 2020. Herding behaviour in digital currency markets: An integrated survey and 
empirical estimation. Heliyon 6, e04752. 
Lee, Y. -H., Hay, C., Liu, H. -C., Diaz, J.F., 2021. Further Evidence of Herding Behavior in 
Cryptocurrency Markets During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of Accounting, Finance 
& Management Strategy 16, 151–170. 
Li, R., Li, S., Yuan, D., Zhu, H., 2021. Investor attention and cryptocurrency: Evidence from 
wavelet-based quantile Granger causality analysis. Research in International Business and 
Finance 56, 101389. 
Li, T., Shin, D., Wang, B., 2021. Cryptocurrency Pump -and-Dump Schemes (SSRN Scholarly 
Paper No. ID 3267041). Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY. 
Li, Y., Zhang, W., Xiong, X., Wang, P. , 2020. Does size matter in the cryptocurrency market? 
Applied Economics Letters 27, 1141–1149. 
Li, Y., Urquhart, A., Wang, P., Zhang, W., 2021. MAX momentum in cryptocurrency markets. 
International Review of Financial Analysis 77, 101829. 
Lin, C.-H., Yen, K.-C., Cheng, H.-P., 2021. Lottery-like momentum in the cryptocurrency market. 
The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 58, 101552.

ew of Financial Analysis 77, 101829. 
Lin, C.-H., Yen, K.-C., Cheng, H.-P., 2021. Lottery-like momentum in the cryptocurrency market. 
The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 58, 101552. 
Liu, W., Liang, X., Cui, G., 2020. Common risk factors in the returns on cryptocurrencies. 
Economic Modelling 86, 299–305. 
Luo, D., Mishra, T., Yarovaya, L., Zhang, Z., 2021. Investing during a Fintech Revolution: 
Ambiguity and return risk in cryptocurrencies. Journal of International Financial Markets, 
Institutions and Money 73, 101362. 
Manahov, V., 2021. Cryptocurrency liquidity during extreme price movements: is there a problem 
with virtual money? Quantitative Finance 21, 341–360. 
Mandaci, P., Cagli, E.C., 2022. Herding intensity and volatility in cryptocurrency markets during 
the COVID-19. Finance Research Letters 102382. 
Matkovskyy, R., Jalan, A., 2019. From financial markets to Bitcoin markets: A fresh look at the 
contagion effect. Finance Research Letters 31, 93–97. 
Mnif, E., Jarboui, A., Mouakhar, K., 2020. How the cryptocurrency market has perf ormed during 
COVID 19? A multifractal analysis. Finance Research Letters 36, 101647. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

26 
 
Naeem, M.A., Mbarki, I., Shahzad, S.J.H., 2021. Predictive role of online investor sentiment for 
cryptocurrency market: Evidence from happiness and fears. International Re view of 
Economics & Finance 73, 496–514. 
Naeem, M.A., Mbarki, I., Suleman, M.T., Vo, X.V., Shahzad, S.J.H., n.d. Does Twitter Happiness 
Sentiment predict cryptocurrency? International Review of Finance n/a. 
Omane-Adjepong, M., Alagidede, I.P., Lyimo, A.G., Tweneboah, G., 2021. Herding behaviour in 
cryptocurrency and emerging financial markets. Cogent Economics & Finance 9, 1933681. 
Ozdamar, M., Akdeniz, L., Sensoy, A., 2021. Lottery -like preferences and the MAX effect in the 
cryptocurrency market. Financial Innovation 7, 74. 
Panagiotidis, T., Stengos, T., Vravosinos, O., 2019. The effects of markets, uncertainty and search 
intensity on bitcoin returns. International Review of Financial Analysis 63, 220–242. 
Panagiotidis, T., Stengos, T., Vravosinos, O., 2018 . On the determinants of bitcoin returns: A 
LASSO approach. Finance Research Letters 27, 235–240. 
Raafat, R.M., Chater, N., Frith, C., 2009. Herding in humans. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13, 
420–428. 
Raimundo Júnior, G. de S., Palazzi, R.B., Tavares, R. de S., Klotzle, M.C., 2022. Market Stress 
and Herding: A New Approach to the Cryptocurrency Market. Journal of Behavioral 
Finance 23, 43–57. 
Ren, B., Lucey, B., 2022. Do clean and dirty cryptocurrency markets herd differently? Finance 
Research Letters 47, 102795.

h to the Cryptocurrency Market. Journal of Behavioral 
Finance 23, 43–57. 
Ren, B., Lucey, B., 2022. Do clean and dirty cryptocurrency markets herd differently? Finance 
Research Letters 47, 102795. 
Rubbaniy, G., Polyzos, S., Rizvi, S.K.A., 2020. COVID -19, Lockdowns and Herding Towards a 
Cryptocurrency Market-Specific Implied Volatility Index (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 
3740575). Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY. 
Schatzmann, J.E ., Haslhofer, B., 2020. Bitcoin Trading is Irrational! An Analysis of the 
Disposition Effect in Bitcoin. arXiv:2010.12415 [cs, econ, q-fin]. 
Shrotryia, V.K., Kalra, H., 2021. Herding in the crypto market: a diagnosis of heavy distribution 
tails. Review of Behavioral Finance ahead-of-print. 
Sibley, S.E., Wang, Y., Xing, Y., Zhang, X., 2016. The information content of the sentiment 
index. Journal of Banking & Finance 62, 164–179. 
Susana, D., Kavisanmathi, J.K., Sreejith, S., 2020. Does Herding Behaviour Among Traders 
Increase During Covid 19 Pandemic? Evidence from the Cryptocurrency Market, in: 
Sharma, S.K., Dwivedi, Y.K., Metri, B., Rana, N.P. (Eds.), Re -Imagining Diffusion and 
Adoption of Information Technology and Systems: A Continuing Conversation, IFIP 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

27 
 
Advances in Information and Communication Technology. Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, pp. 178–189. 
Takeda, F., Wakao, T., 2014. Google search intensity and its relationship with returns and trading 
volume of Japanese stocks. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 27, 1-18. 
Urquhart, A., 2018. What causes the attention of Bitcoin? Economics Letters 166, 40–44. 
Vidal-Tomás, D., Ibáñez, A.M., Farinós, J.E., 2019. Herding in the cryptocurrency market: CSSD 
and CSAD approaches. Finance Research Letters 30, 181–186. 
Wen, Z., Bouri, E., Xu, Y., Zhao, Y., 2022. Intraday return predictability in the cryptocurrency 
markets: momentum, reversal, or both (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. 4080253). Social 
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY. 
Yarovaya, L., Matkovskyy, R., Jalan, A., 2021. The effects of a “black swan” event (COVID -19) 
on herding behavior in cryptocurrency markets. Journal of International Financial Markets, 
Institutions and Money 75, 101321. 
Zhang, S., Zhou, X., Pan, H., Jia, J., 2019. Cryptocurrency, confirmatory bias and news readability 
– evidence from the largest Chinese cryptocurrency exchange. Accounting & Finance 58, 
1445–1468. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

28 
 
Tables 
 
Table 1: Herding related literature. 
 Main Findings 
Panel A: Herding Behaviour 
Ballis and Drakos (2020) The results provide evidence that the up-events market dispersion follows market 
movements at a faster pace compared to the down events. 
Blasco et al. (2022) The presence of herding behaviour among exchanges around the expiration of Bitcoin 
futures traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), appears to be significant 
during the week before expiration. 
Bouri et al. (2019) The findings indicate that there is considerable herding behaviour that fluctuates over 
time, and that herding tends to occur as uncertainty increases. 
Choi et al. (2022) Finding reveal anti-herding behaviour at shorter time intervals and herding during longer 
periods, with the phenomenon being even stronger in the latter during down markets. 
Da Gama Silva et al. (2019) The results revealed herding behaviour, demonstrating extreme periods of adverse herd 
behaviour. 
Gurdgiev and O’Loughlin (2020) Results show that investor sentiment can predict the price direction of cryptocurrencies, 
indicating direct impact of herding and anchoring biases 
Haryanto et al. (2020) Findings show that the cryptocurrency market exhibits a reverse disposition effect in 
bullish periods and the usual positive disposition effect in bearish periods. 
Jalal et al. (2020) The presence of herding is confirmed in cryptocurrencies in the upper quantiles during

n effect in 
bullish periods and the usual positive disposition effect in bearish periods. 
Jalal et al. (2020) The presence of herding is confirmed in cryptocurrencies in the upper quantiles during 
bullish and high volatility times due to investor overexcitement, which leads to large 
volume trading. 
Júnior et al. (2020) Results demonstrate that regardless of market conditions, herding toward the market 
exhibits substantial movement and persistence. 
Kaiser and Stöckl (2020) The study shows experimentally that herding measures focused on a transfer currency 
give a more exact depiction of dispersion in investors’ opinions on the cryptocurrency 
market. 
Kallinterakis and Wang (2019) The results suggest that, besides herding and asymmetry (stronger during up-markets), 
the cryptocurrency market entails strong destabilizing potential. 
King and Koutmos (2021) Study documents heterogeneity in the types of feedback trading strategies investors 
utilize across markets. 
Kumar (2020) Herding is pronounced when the market is either passing through stress or has become 
highly volatile. 
Kyriazis (2020) The empirical estimations of the study reveal that herding behaviour is evident only in 
bull markets. 
Manahov (2021) The results of the study demonstrate that cryptocurrency traders facilitate EPMs and 
demand liquidity even during the utmost EPMs, observing the presence of herding 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour during up markets across the entire dataset. 
Omane-Adjepong et al. (2021) Results reference significant symmetric crowd and imitation trading, which are 
dependent on time, along with asymmetric herd behaviour in the cryptocurrency and 
stock markets. 
Raimundo Júnior et al. (2022) Findings showcase that herding toward the market shows significant movement, and 
persistence regardless of the market condition. 
Ren and Lucey (2022) Results show that herding is present only in the “black/dirty” market and is even more 
pronounced during periods of down markets. Furthermore, they show that “green/clean” 
cryptocurrencies herd with “black/dirty” cryptocurrencies when both markets are 
positive. 
Vidal-Tomás et al. (2019) The smallest cryptocurrencies are herding with the largest ones 
Panel B: No Herding 
Amirat and Alwafi (2020) Results state that no indication of herding tendency was present in the results when using 
the cross-sectional absolute standard deviation method. 
Coskun et al. (2020) The findings for the entire sample point to anti-herding behaviour. Additionally, during 
the ‘up and down’ market phases, there was no notable asymmetric behaviour. 
Kurt Gümüş et al. (2019) The results of the study indicate no evidence of herding behaviour in the cryptocurrency 
market in both CSSD and CSAD approaches. 
Panel C: Herding during the COVID-19 Pandemic 
Lee et al.

al. (2019) The results of the study indicate no evidence of herding behaviour in the cryptocurrency 
market in both CSSD and CSAD approaches. 
Panel C: Herding during the COVID-19 Pandemic 
Lee et al. (2021) Find that herding effect is present, only during down markets in periods of high volatility 
and up markets in periods of low volatility. 
Mandaci and Cagli (2022) Findings reveal significant herding behaviour during the COVID-19 outbreak. 
Mnif et al. (2020) Results show that all, except for Bitcoin, become more efficient in the post-COVID-19 
period; that is, less herding behaviour exists after the pandemic. 
Rubbaniy et al. (2021) Their empirical results reveal the presence if herding behaviour during extreme market 
conditions, with significant herding being found during COVID-19 post-lockdowns 
periods. 
Shrotryia and Kalra (2021) Herding is present during normal, bullish and high volatility periods. 
Susana et al. (2020) The analysis revealed that herding was present among all cryptocurrencies of the sample 
in normal conditions, but not during market upswing or downswing. 
Yarovaya et al. (2021) Findings show that although the COVID-19 pandemic increased the volatility in 
cryptocurrency markets, it does not seem to cause stronger herding in these markets. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Set of studies on the topics of momentum and overreaction. 
 Main Findings 
Begušić and Kostanjčar (2019) Results show a substantial momentum impact in the most liquid cryptocurrencies, 
corroborating investor herding hypotheses. 
Borgards (2021) Empirical results give evidence that high percentage of asset classes' creation phases 
are followed by momentum periods, indicating that the momentum effect is robust 
Caporale and Plastun (2020) Findings show that hourly returns on positive/negative anomalous returns during the 
day are considerably higher/lower than on a typical positive/negative day. 
Chevapatrakul and Mascia (2019) Lower quantiles of the daily return distribution and upper quantiles of the weekly 
return distribution show positive correlation with historical returns, indicating 
overreaction. 
Chu et al. (2020) Findings indicate that the momentum method has the potential to be utilised 
successfully for bitcoin trading at a high frequency. 
Grobys and Sapkota (2019) The findings, in contrary to earlier studies, do not indicate any evidence of significant 
momentum payoffs. 
Jia et al. (2022) The study introduced a three-factor pricing model including market, size, and 
momentum factors, outperforming relevant models. 
Kosc et al. (2019) The empirical results show a clear and significant dominance of the short-term 
contrarian effect over both momentum effect and the benchmark portfolios. 
Liu et al.

levant models. 
Kosc et al. (2019) The empirical results show a clear and significant dominance of the short-term 
contrarian effect over both momentum effect and the benchmark portfolios. 
Liu et al. (2020) Results show that there are anomalous returns that decrease with size and increase 
with return momentum, and the momentum effect is more significant in small 
cryptocurrencies. 
Wen et al. (2022) The findings showcase evidence of intraday return predictability, consisting of both 
intraday momentum and reversal, in the cryptocurrency market. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Summarises the set of papers on bubbles and contagion effects. 
 Main Findings 
Corbet et al. (2022) Through a regime-switching skew-normal (RSSN) methodology, results reveal that 
contagion effects are present among several important Chinese stock market indices 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Gronwald (2021) The results show that there is strong evidence of explosive periods in cryptocurrency 
prices. 
Li et al. (2021) Results indicate that pump-and-dump schemes lead to short-term bubbles featuring 
dramatic increases in prices, volume, and volatility. 
Matkovskyy and Jalan (2019) The empirical results showcase significant contagion effects from financial to Bitcoin 
markets in terms of both correlation and co-skewness of market returns. Furthermore, 
the findings also indicate that during crisis periods, risk-averse investors exhibit the 
tendency to move away from risky cryptocurrency markets towards safer financial 
markets. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

32 
 
Table 4: Set of papers on sentiment and uncertainty. 
 Main Findings 
Panel A: Investor Sentiment (Attention) 
AlNemer et al. (2021) The empirical findings reveal that the Sentix Investor Confidence index is useful in 
understanding the long-term fluctuations of Bitcoin and Litecoin values. 
Chen et al. (2019) Findings indicate that investor sentiment positively predicts excess CRIX returns 
without significant evidence of return reversal. 
Li et al. (2021) Findings show that investor attention has a relatively stronger impact on the 
cryptocurrency returns in bearish markets than that in bullish markets in the short 
term. 
Naeem et al. (2021) Results show that happiness sentiment reveals to be a persistent and robust 
predictor for most cryptocurrency returns. 
Panel B: Market/Public sentiment 
Anamika and Subramaniam (2022) Results showcase that there is a significant impact in investor sentiment and 
cryptocurrency returns by headline news. 
Anastasiou et al. (2021) Findings show that cryptocurrencies’ price crash risk is positively related to the 
FEARS index, indicating that a higher crisis sentiment by investors increases 
cryptocurrencies’ price crash risk. 
Ayvaz and Shiha (2018) The findings show that utilising lexicon-based sentiment analysis approaches to 
forecast Bitcoin price fluctuations is unreliable. 
Baig et al. (2019) Empirical results suggest that sentiment has a strong positive association with price 
clustering. 
Demir et al.

s approaches to 
forecast Bitcoin price fluctuations is unreliable. 
Baig et al. (2019) Empirical results suggest that sentiment has a strong positive association with price 
clustering. 
Demir et al. (2018) The research reveals that Bitcoin returns are essentially inversely related to the 
EPU. 
Garcia and Schweitzer (2015) According to the findings of their analysis, rising Bitcoin prices are preceded by 
growing opinion polarisation and exchange volume, while rising emotional valence 
is preceded by rising opinion polarisation and exchange volume. 
Gurdgiev et al. (2019) The analysis shows how sentiment analysis may be used to estimate the impacts of 
four distinct types of attitudes toward cryptocurrency marketplaces in order to 
forecast price movement. 
Panel C: Search Volume Predictability 
Bleher and Dimplf (2019) The results indicate that returns are not predictable while volatility is predictable to 
some extent. 
Garcia and Schweitzer (2015) Study states that the search volume variable carries no information which is useful 
as a trading signal. 
Garcia et al. (2014) Results identify two feedback loops, one driven by word of mouth, and the other by 
new Bitcoin adopters, that lead public interest towards price bubbles. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guégan and Renault (2021) Empirical results indicate a statistically significant relationship between investor 
sentiment and Bitcoin returns for frequencies of up to 15 minutes. 
Kristoufek (2013) Findings showed that increased interest in Bitcoin leads to higher prices, which 
subsequently results back into even higher search volume. 
Panagiotidis et al. (2019) Showed evidence that gold and search intensity are the most important drivers of 
Bitcoin returns. 
Urquhart (2018) Analysis finds that searches do not seem to serve as a suitable volatility predictor. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562

34 
 
 
Table 5: Studies dealing with the impact of behavioural finance elements on cryptocurrency 
investment decisions, optimism bias, disposition, lottery and size effect. 
 Main Findings 
Al-Mansour (2020) The findings of the study demonstrate that herding theory, prospect theory, and 
heuristic theory have a substantial impact on investors’ Bitcoin investing 
decisions. 
Aloosh and Ouzan (2020) The study shows that the cryptocurrency market has a significant small price bias, 
which supports the idea that investors respond to news differently depending on 
the price level. 
Caferra (2020) The results showcase that the peaks and falls of optimism determine returns 
variability using both cross-sectional standard and absolute deviation. 
Cao and Rhue (2019) They find that positive sentiment contributes significantly negatively to Bitcoin 
return on the same day (negative sentiment day contributes positively, although 
not significantly), extending the understanding of disposition effect. 
Castro (2019) The results show that although indeed there is disposition effect in Bitcoin, it is 
proven to be much stronger for stocks. 
Grobys and Junttila (2021) The results suggest that parallel to stock markets, similar behavioural mechanisms 
of underlying investor behaviour are present also in new virtual currency markets. 
Haryanto et al. (2020) The analysis reveals that the cryptocurrency market exhibits a reverse disposition

hanisms 
of underlying investor behaviour are present also in new virtual currency markets. 
Haryanto et al. (2020) The analysis reveals that the cryptocurrency market exhibits a reverse disposition 
effect in bullish periods and the usual positive disposition effect in bearish periods. 
Hidajat (2019) The analysis implies that prices and Bitcoin transactions are more determined by 
psychological factors. 
Li et al. (2020) This research finds that cryptocurrencies with small market value tend to perform 
better in the future. 
Li et al. (2021) The results demonstrate that cryptocurrencies with higher maximum daily returns 
tend to achieve higher returns in the future and call this the “MAX momentum” 
effect. 
Lin et al. (2021) The results showcase a lottery-like momentum, meaning that a higher maximum 
return leads to a higher future return among 64 cryptocurrencies. 
Luo et al. (2021) Results show that Bitcoin investors exhibit, on average, an increasing aversion to 
ambiguity. Furthermore, investors are found to earn abnormal returns only when 
ambiguity is low. 
Ozdamar et al. (2021) The analysis provides evidence for a positive and statistically significant 
relationship between the maximum daily return within the previous month (MAX) 
and the expected returns on cryptocurrencies. 
Schatzmann and Haslhofer (2020) The analysis shows that investors are indeed subject to the disposition effect,

return within the previous month (MAX) 
and the expected returns on cryptocurrencies. 
Schatzmann and Haslhofer (2020) The analysis shows that investors are indeed subject to the disposition effect, 
tending to sell their winning positions too soon and holding on to their losing 
position for too long. 
Zhang et al. (2019) The study finds that investors’ response to authority-related news is negative and 
statistically significant. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4119562
