www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 156
The Intraday Pattern of Trading Activity, Return Volatility and Liquidity: 
Evidence from the Emerging Tunisian Stock Exchange 
Kais Tissaoui 
Faculty of Law Sciences, Economic Sciences and Management of Jendouba, BP 8153 
Elmelga Jendouba, Tunisia 
The International Finance Group, Tunisia, Manar University 
Tel: 216-25-700-645 E-mail: kaistissaoui@yahoo.fr 
 
Received: Febriary 10, 2012 Accepted: March 14, 2012 Published: May 1, 2012 
doi:10.5539/ijef.v4n5p156 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ijef.v4n5p156 
 
Abstract 
The purpose of this paper is to investigate the intraday pattern of trading activity, liquidity and return volatility in the 
emerging Tunisian Stock Market (TSE) which is an order-driven market using intraday data covering the period 
October 2008 to June 2009. To achieve this objective, we have applied two methods: the temporal analysis that 
consists to estimate a dichotomy model for each variable by following the methodological approach of Vo (2007) 
and the second method is to apply the spectrum analysis by using the Fourier Transform fast (FFT). The results have 
shown that all identified variables are characterized by notable seasonality justified the rejection of the hypothesis of 
constancy (H
0). Both methods have shown the existence a seasonal pattern in U. The reason considered to justify

re characterized by notable seasonality justified the rejection of the hypothesis of 
constancy (H
0). Both methods have shown the existence a seasonal pattern in U. The reason considered to justify 
this intraday behavior is the crucial role played by th e problem of adverse selectio n especially between the two 
dimensions of liquidity: the spread and depth at the best limit. It should also be noted the effect of inventory 
management on the optimal allocation of the portfolio. 
Keywords: Intraday pattern, Trading volume, Liquidity, Return volatility, Intraday data, FFT algorithm, Tunisian 
stock market. 
JEL classifications: G12, G14, G15 
1. Introduction 
Intraday pattern in stock markets has attracted much research attention. This importance is due to the existence of 
intraday regularities in stock market that contests the Efficient Markets Hypothesis. To analyze this anomaly, we are 
forced to focus on the causes generating this behavior. The understanding of these causes has a significant interest in 
the microstructure theory in order to study the market reaction and the trading activity. Indeed, the obtaining of an 
efficient market is difficult in this situation since the arrival of new information generates abnormal micro-structural 
pattern called the “Intraday pattern”. In this context, the researchers have tried to explain the sources of this anomaly

on since the arrival of new information generates abnormal micro-structural 
pattern called the “Intraday pattern”. In this context, the researchers have tried to explain the sources of this anomaly 
by concentrating on the effect of information on strategies for insider trading and uninformed trading during the 
day.This anomaly may affect the market equilibrium. Ho wever, each investor wants to maximize his utility. This 
objective is legitimate but the question is how to achiev e that? We are facing an enigma difficult to solve because 
the informed investors involved in the market take adva ntage of their private inform ation when the uninformed 
intervene cautiously for the liquidity needs. Indeed, the strategic behavior of each investor depends on his position 
in the market. The literature of microstructure has focuse d on both types of information to explain behavior of 
intraday stock market. Public information comes on the ma rket in the form "news". De gennaro and Shrieves (1997) 
have examined the importance of news in explaining the trading strategies of the investors and especially the market 
volatility. They divided the news into three categories based on Reuters: the macroeconomic news, the economic 
policies news and the news on interest rates. Cheung and Kwan (1992) presented an exhaustive literature review that 
focuses on the public information flow on the stock market. Kalev et al (2004) have used specific categories of news

est rates. Cheung and Kwan (1992) presented an exhaustive literature review that 
focuses on the public information flow on the stock market. Kalev et al (2004) have used specific categories of news 
to companies listed on ASX as the announcement of results, dividends, changes in shareholding, the capital increase, 
the change of CEO, reports of accountants. According to Edmonds and Kutan (2002), most studies have examined 
the importance of public information by claiming that such information was not significant in explaining the 
variation of stock returns. This insufficiency in the ro le of public information obliged the researchers of the 
microstructure theory to examine the impact of public info rmation by using the trading volume as a latent variable. 
Lamoureux and Lastrapes (1990) justified this theoretical approach by the fact that when public information is

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 157
disseminated on the stock market, this information is unobservable by investors but motivate them to make 
transactions purchase or sale, and especially to achieve an optimal allocation of resources in spite of its randomness. 
Moreover, it is unevenly distributed and interpreted differently. Researchers have identified the role played by the 
transactions numbers, turnover and news as explicit variables representing the implicit public information. The use 
of such variables was justified also by Clark (1973), Tauchen and Pitts (1983), Anderson (1996). This focus 
coincides with two theoretical explanations based mainly on information: the MDH (The mixture of distribution 
hypothesis) and SIAH (the sequential information arrival hypothesis). 
However, we must not focus only on public information but also on private information. This concept has 
represented, according to several analysts, the source of the problem of adverse selection in the stock market. 
Madhavan et al (1997) reported that the information flow and transactions frictions represented the factors 
explaining the intraday volatility and liquidity. While Ad mati and Pfleider (1988) and Foster and Viswanathan 
(1990) attributed the difference in tr ansaction activity, liquidity and volatility to the ability of investors to benefit

nd liquidity. While Ad mati and Pfleider (1988) and Foster and Viswanathan 
(1990) attributed the difference in tr ansaction activity, liquidity and volatility to the ability of investors to benefit 
from their private information. Indeed, take advantage of this information is beneficial for informed investors "the 
insiders" while the possession of private information is considered by the uninformed investors 'liquidity traders' as 
information risk. According to the theory of asymmetric information, informed investors have private information 
on the value of quoted companies. This information would put them in a favorable position than other investors. 
Brockman and Chung (2001) have argued that the presen ce of insiders can reduce market liquidity since these 
informed investors profit from the private information by including it implicitly in stock prices through their trading 
activities. This requires the informed investors to respond to this informational disadvantage by reducing trading 
activity. But, the problem is aggravated when the uninformed investors accept this situation a nd remaining on the 
market as followers. Indeed, Admati and Pfleider (1988.1989) have proposed, through their theoretical model, a 
solution that uninformed investors must do their transactions together to minimize monopolistic position of insiders. 
The strategy of uninformed investors consists to limit their losses by a large proportion with insiders. In addition, if

o their transactions together to minimize monopolistic position of insiders. 
The strategy of uninformed investors consists to limit their losses by a large proportion with insiders. In addition, if 
a great part of transaction is realized in the interior of trading day and not at the start or the end of day, the needs 
liquidity may reduce the insider-information risk. But the adoption of this strategy does not hide many threats which 
can meet the uninformed because the risk of loss of wealth is very important particularly in the presence of 
opportunistic insiders who take advantage of their private information. 
In this study, we use two methods to achieve our objective: the temporal analysis that consists to estimate a 
dichotomy model for each variable by following the Vo (2007) methodology and the second method is to apply the 
spectrum analysis by using the Fourier Tr ansform Fast (FFT). Our objective is to examine the intraday behavior of 
trading activity, return volatility and market liquidity on th e Tunisian stock market in order to see if it has similar 
intraday patterns observed in other markets. Our empirical investigation is founded on a sample covering, in 
intraday frequency, 38 stocks continuously quoted on the TSE for the period (October 2008-June 2009). Many 
questions have been asked leading to reasonable solutions allowing the comprehension of that irregularity: Why

38 stocks continuously quoted on the TSE for the period (October 2008-June 2009). Many 
questions have been asked leading to reasonable solutions allowing the comprehension of that irregularity: Why 
does that anomaly exist? What are the causes generating the intraday pattern? Does the shape of the pattern differ 
from one market to another? Does the existing pattern depend essentially on the periodicities of the information flow? 
The main finding observed is that both methods have shown the existence of seasonal pattern in U in Tunisian stock 
maeket. The reason defined to justify this intraday behavi or is the crucial role played by the problem of adverse 
selection especially between the two dimensions of liquidity: the spread and depth at the best limit. It should also be 
noted the effect of inventory management on the optimal allocation of the portfolio. This present study also 
contributes to the related literature in several ways. To the best of our knowledge, our research is the first study that 
investigated the anomaly of seasonality on the Tunisian stock market after the promulgation of financial security 
information law since 2005 by the Financial Market Counc il. Second, we have used another dimension measuring 
liquidity. It is “the depth at the best limit”. This variable is not used in any study on the Tunisian stock market to 
investigate the anomaly of seasonality. The unexploited of depth does not give a clear idea on the behavior of

he best limit”. This variable is not used in any study on the Tunisian stock market to 
investigate the anomaly of seasonality. The unexploited of depth does not give a clear idea on the behavior of 
intraday liquidity.Third, the Fourier Transform fast (FFT) algorithm have never been employed in order to examine 
the seasonality in the Tunisian context. At last, we noted that a small number of empirical studies have focused on 
emerging stock markets particularly in countries of Midd le East and North Africa(MENA). Major previous studies 
concentrated on developed stock markets. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 review s the literature on the relationship between information and 
intraday pattern. Section 3 provides the theoretical explan ation of intraday seasonnality. Section 4 describes the 
Tunisia stock market, data used and presents the defin ition of variables of trading activity, return volatility and 
liquidity. The section 5 presents the methodology used in the paper and the main findings. The paper concludes by 
summarizing the main conclusions

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 158
2. The Relationship between Information and Intraday Pattern in Literature 
The answer to these questions requires firstly the understanding of the relation between the information flow and 
this microstructural anomaly. "Intraday pattern" is certain ly an anomaly due to its pa rticular micro-structural 
features. The presence of this issue has motivated the researchs on the sources of this anomaly. However the detailed 
explanation of this notion obliges us to place it in an enormous quantity of literature. But the majority of the 
literature derived from developed countr ies, particularly the Un ited States and Canada. Since the 80s, there have 
been a review articles on microstructure that have tried to analyze the existing patterns in the stock market. Admati 
and Pfleider (1988) have developed the theoretical foundations of trading pattern on the financial market. The 
authors have taken advantage enormously from the intraday transaction data since the daily data do not permit to 
investigate the behavior of the intraday market. They have demonstrated that the profile U characterized the pattern 
of trading volume and return volatility. That means that trading volume and return volatility are higher at the 
beginning of trading day and in the end but they are weak during the day. Their results have confirmed the findings

olatility. That means that trading volume and return volatility are higher at the 
beginning of trading day and in the end but they are weak during the day. Their results have confirmed the findings 
of Jain and Joh (1986). Wood, Mc Inish and Ord (1985) have tested empirically the existence of a U-pattern using 
transactions data minute by minute. They argued that the return and return volatility are distinguished at the 
beginning and the end of the trading day by a U-shaped profile. On the basis of this result, theoretical approach of 
Admati and Pfleider (1988) consists in understanding the r easons why transactions tend to be concentrated more on 
specific periods of the day than during other periods, an d especially to know why the patterns of volatility and 
trading volumes are identical.Microstructure literature was interested enormously in studying the behavior of 
different intraday micro-stru ctural variables but the first academic res earches have been commenced in a market 
driven price. This market is very specific since it is char acterized by the presence of market makers. According to 
Madavan (1992), this market represents a location where the investors may get the price quotations of market 
makers prior to submission their purchase orders and sales orders. 
In this case, the market maker acts as an intermediary be tween buyers and sellers with prices determined before 
quantities. He is regarded as a liquidity supplier in the fi nancial marketplace.

rs. 
In this case, the market maker acts as an intermediary be tween buyers and sellers with prices determined before 
quantities. He is regarded as a liquidity supplier in the fi nancial marketplace. Given these specificities related to the 
mechanisms used to accomplish the transactions and particul arly recent availability of transactional data, quotations 
and orders issued in numerous markets around the world, Researchers on phenomena intraday stock market have 
exploited efficiently these conditions in order to confirm that U-pattern was the form most particular in the 
majority of markets in United states and other developed countries whether for return and volatility, liquidity and 
trading volume. But the results do not overlook another area that the pattern can take the form L-pattern, Y-pattern, 
or the opposite case of both forms as they depend largely of the characteristics of structural conditions in markets, 
mechanisms of transactions and the information flow. 
For the markets of United States, the study of Wood, Mc Inich and Ord (1985) is considered the first study which 
was concentrated on the availability for this anomaly as the presence of seasonality in the stock market can 
contradict the market efficiency. They have shown that trading volume, return, return volatility and liquidity 
followed a U-pattern. All of these variab les are high at the opening of the tr ading day but they become low during 
the trading day in order to increase at closing.

return volatility and liquidity 
followed a U-pattern. All of these variab les are high at the opening of the tr ading day but they become low during 
the trading day in order to increase at closing. More prec isely the behavior of the ma rket at the opening and the 
closing is different than within trading day in the NYSE. I ndeed, their article examined empirically the nature of the 
generating process respecting the features of the transaction size, transaction frequency and transaction interval for 
the majority of actions in the NYSE. This research was e nhanced by the analysis Pfleider and Admati (1988). These 
authors have verified the same intraday pattern for the Exxon Company stock during the year 1981. They have 
based their study on a theoretical model respecting two co mplementary characteristics: the process of information 
and the number of uninformed investors. The patterns shown in trading volume and return are mainly due to the 
strategic interaction between insiders and investors need to liquidity. The microstructure analysis has verified the 
presence of other forms of seasonality other than U-patte rn still in the American context. Amihud and Mendelson 
(1987) have tried to test the effect of information on the behavior of returns at various times of the transaction day 
for 30 stocks forming the Dow-Jones. They proved that the returns at the opening are more variable than those at the 
closing market.

n the behavior of returns at various times of the transaction day 
for 30 stocks forming the Dow-Jones. They proved that the returns at the opening are more variable than those at the 
closing market. The same result was confirmed by Stoll and Whaley (1990) for the NYSE stocks. They have also 
shown a high return volatility at the opening of the NYSE. Within the same context, Cerety and Mulherin (1994) 
have examined the existence of trans itional character of volatility during the transaction day. They looked that the 
returns are more volatile at the opening than at the closin g day. For their part, Mc Inich and Wood (1992) have 
studied the behavior of Bid ask spread within the transaction day depending upon 4 very important factors: the 
trading activity, risk, information and competition. They found that the behavior of liquidity measure shaped profile 
follows the reversed J-pattern. Other researchers are also in terested to test the presence of this micro-structural 
anomaly in the U.S. stock markets such as Harris (1986 ), Mc Inish and Wood (1990), Foster and Viswanathan 
(1993), Ho and Cheung (1991). All these authors have suppo rted the presence of a seas onal U-pattern of return

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 159
volatility within the day. While other researchers have veri fied that the Bid-ask spread (Hashbrouck (1991a, b), and 
Mc Inich Wood (1992), Foster and Viswanathan (1993), Handa (1992), trading volume (Jain and Joh (1988), Mc 
Inich and Wood (1989.1990 b)), the number of transaction (Mc Inich and Wood (1989), Chan et al (1995)) follow a 
U-pattern for the stocks of NYSE. Similarly, Chan, Christe and Schultz (1995) have shown that the bid-ask spread 
of the stocks comprising the NASDAQ index follows a J-pattern. In other words, it becomes weak during the trading 
day but it increases again during the closing minutes. This finding confirmed by Chung and Van Ness (2001), the 
NASDAQ, before and after the reforms in 1997 that have af fected the market. Chan et al (1993) have proved that 
the intraday bid-ask spread is higher immediately after the opening of mark et to decline enormously over the day 
and returns to his initial situation at the end of transac tions. That same behavior has characterized the trading 
volume and return volatility. 
Other interested authors are still looking for this anomaly in other developed equity ma rkets. Such studies have 
benefited recently from the availability of the high-frequency data on these price-driven markets. In this context,

ll looking for this anomaly in other developed equity ma rkets. Such studies have 
benefited recently from the availability of the high-frequency data on these price-driven markets. In this context, 
Abhyanker et al (1997) contributed to enriching the existing literature by their study on the London Stock Exchange. 
They showed that the bid-ask spread, trading volume and return volatility are characterized by a seasonal pattern in 
the form U, but this behavior differs depending on the liq uidity of the stocks. However, the main lesson retained 
from the study of the intraday pattern in the price driven market was clear because no many countries adopt that 
transactional structure within their markets. 
The majority of countries around the world introduced anot her system for trading within their stock markets. This 
system is characterized by a negligence of the role played by market maker in favor of the investor. In this sense, 
Madavan (1992) defined an order-driven market like a system in which investor s place their orders in order to be 
executed by the method of the auction. The flexibility of this organization is mainly due the functioning because it 
can operate under continuous trading and gives investors the opportunity to submit their purchasing or selling orders 
for immediate execution against orders on the existing order book with prices determined multilaterally. While a

ing and gives investors the opportunity to submit their purchasing or selling orders 
for immediate execution against orders on the existing order book with prices determined multilaterally. While a 
quotation in auction provides an opportunity for investors to submit their orders before the opening in the 
marketplace to run when the market is op ened with a price determined unilatera lly. In order to understand the role 
played by the order-driven market, we had to try to distingu ish this market with the price-driven market. Indeed, the 
order-driven market became more and more used as a suitabl e field to understand the anomalies. According to Ahn, 
Bae and Chan (2001), all the liquidity is supplied by th e purchase orders and sales rders and not by the market 
maker. Without forgeting the role played by those or ders as a source of volatility and transaction activity, 
researchers have exploited the situation enormously in order to show the seasonal pattern of each variable in this 
order-driven market. 
In this framework, it is important to examine the info rmational content the order book by concentrating on the 
structural properties of the stock market . According to Noes and Skjeltorp (2006) , this book represents the heart of 
the order-driven market through its ability to provide useful information on the liquidity and trading activity. On the 
developed stock markets as the Paris Bourse, Biais et al (1995) have confirmed the dependence of the pattern with

ability to provide useful information on the liquidity and trading activity. On the 
developed stock markets as the Paris Bourse, Biais et al (1995) have confirmed the dependence of the pattern with 
the information effect. For their part, Hamao and Hasbrouck (1995) have concentrated on the stock market in Tokyo 
(TSE). This market represented one among the largest market in the world given its structural characteristics. This 
has allowed Lehman and Modest (1994) to investigate the behavior of the bid ask spread the trading volume, 
transaction and other variables of transactions by confirming the presence of a U-pattern. For his part, Vo (2007) 
attempted to show the pattern characterizing the liquidity, trading volume and volatility in the stock market (TSE) in 
the context specified by a dependency between the information flow and the investors. The results shown confirmed 
the presence of this anomaly in this market as the trad ing volume and the bid ask spread follow a U-pattern while 
the depth follows an inverted U-pattern . Recently, several researchers have orie nted their microstructure studies on 
emerging stock markets adopting the order-driven system seen the improvement Technologies in information 
dissemination. This approach supports the view of Handa et al (1998, p.48) who said: "differently to a price driven 
market, the provision of liquidity in an order-driven market has received special attention in relation the

ch supports the view of Handa et al (1998, p.48) who said: "differently to a price driven 
market, the provision of liquidity in an order-driven market has received special attention in relation the 
microstructure literature."Within this framework it is part of the study of Brockman and Chung (1999) on the stock 
market in Hong Kong. They made two tests: an intertemporal analysis that allows them to confirm the inverted 
U-shaped profile of depth. And a cross-sectional analysis that enables them to demonstrate that the depth depends 
essentially on the adverse selection problem similar to the bid-ask spread. But the inter- temporal analysis appeared 
as a significant dependence of the behavior of liquidity with other variables such as price level, trading volume and 
volatility in order to verify that the provision of liquidity is a competitive dimension that will help to identify the 
best structure of mechanism transaction. Brockman and Chung (1998) also verified that the profile characterizing 
the Bid ask spread on the Hong Kong stock market is a profile in U. In a context of microstructure marked by a 
strategic interaction between inside rs and uninformed, Lee, Fok and Li u (2001) have exploited the recent

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 160
availability of order book data from the stock market in Ta iwan. They have tried to anal yze the pattern of intraday 
information and liquidity. The results indicated that investors using an investment strategy generating a J-shaped 
profile for the volume of transaction. Ahn and Cheung (1999) have studied the evolution of the intraday Bid ask 
spread and depth on the Hong kong stock market They have confirmed the existence of the U-shaped profile of the 
Bid ask spread and an inverted U-shaped profile of the Bid ask spread.Research in this context also has motivated 
Ahn, Bae and Chan (2001) to investigate the role played by the order book in order to explain this anomaly on the 
Hong kong stock market They have focused their study on the empirical relationship between transitional volatility 
and orders flow depending on the investment strategies of orders by insiders and uninformed investors. The results 
shown seem to provide a clear explanation of how the placements of orders since investors want to place them at the 
opening and closing session of trading. By adopting J-pattern according to the pattern of trading volume, the 
phenomenon of the presence of regularity will be privilege d because it also goes be yond the anomalies on the 
market efficiency but it also allows considering the micro- structural side of the market.

enomenon of the presence of regularity will be privilege d because it also goes be yond the anomalies on the 
market efficiency but it also allows considering the micro- structural side of the market. This anomaly has been a 
famous importance that has also very interested Choe and Shin (1993).These authors have tried to study the stock 
market in South Korea. They found that the indraday pattern of return of the KSP index (KOSPI) is a U-pattern 
either throughout the trading day or during the morning session. This anomaly is all the same examined in the 
context Filanda by Camerton-Forde et al (2007). These au thors have analyzed the intraday liquidity and trading 
activity, volatility and information. They found that the trans actions of insiders and uninformed are concentrated at 
the opening and closing of the session transaction which confirms the presence of a U-pattern. In addition, the 
seasonal anomaly is more and more ex amined by other researchers on other emerging markets like Kalev and Pham 
(2009) who have exploited the availability of order book data and transactions in Australian market (ASX) for a 
period from October 2001 to January 2002. They have veri fied that the presence of intraday regularities is clearly 
higher for the stocks of small or medium sized companies compared to the actions of la rge companies. They verify 
the exitence of an inverted U-shaped pattern of intraday trading activities and showed that informed traders search to

edium sized companies compared to the actions of la rge companies. They verify 
the exitence of an inverted U-shaped pattern of intraday trading activities and showed that informed traders search to 
minimize their transaction costs by the se lection an optimum day of the week in order to trade. Indeed, they also 
show that informed traders determine the trading strategies depending on the time of day. 
3. "Intraday Pattern" in the Theory 
Several theoretical studies have attempted to explain this micro-structural phenomenon whether for a price-driven 
market or order-driven markets. They provided several theoretical explanations in order to conclude that this 
anomaly depends essentially on the information.In the financial market; the objective of all investors is to maximize 
their utility based on trading strategies depending on their possession of the information. This dependence 
represented the main process generating the micro-structural anomaly. But the availability of high frequency data 
which has motivated the research in this context. However, this new situation constituted empirically an appropriate 
ground so that the different patterns ap pear since the study of W ood et al (1985) on the NY SE. In order to achieve 
an explanation of what is "intraday pattern," the res earchers focused their effort s to address this question 
theoretically : Why is there this anomaly is she? It seems more interesting to talk deeply as several explanations that

ay pattern," the res earchers focused their effort s to address this question 
theoretically : Why is there this anomaly is she? It seems more interesting to talk deeply as several explanations that 
have been used to support our thinking. 
The first theoretical explanation of Admati and Pfleider (1988). They tried to answer three very important questions: 
Why were transactions concentrated in specific times of day compared to other times? Why are the returns more 
volatile in periods and less volatile in other periods? Why do the periods at high trading volume coincide with 
periods at high return volatility? In this context, they developed a theoretical model based on asymmetric 
information. This model essentially depends on the rela tionship between informed investors and investors need 
liquidity. They justified the presence of investor’s liquidity in the market for strategic reasons in order to minimize 
the monopoly power of insiders since they seek to exploit their private information when uninformed investors make 
their transactions. Admati and Pfleider (1988) argued that the adoption of these behaviors on the part of insiders and 
investors need for liquidity can justify the behavior of intraday liquidity, trading volume, return volatility and return. 
Their theoretical model represented the first theoretical essay explaining the theory "Intraday pattern" in the 
financial market.

of intraday liquidity, trading volume, return volatility and return. 
Their theoretical model represented the first theoretical essay explaining the theory "Intraday pattern" in the 
financial market. Indeed, this theory has shown that all patterns are the result of strategic interaction between 
insiders and uninformed investors. In addition, their theoretical model is based primarily on investor liquidity needs 
and their actions in order to identify the different types of patterns. Investors seek the good times to make their 
transactions when market liquidity is high and transaction co sts are down. This approach is also adopted by insiders 
who choose to do their transactions when the market is liq uid. This strategic interaction between these two types of 
investors generates a situation of concentration of transactions at specific times during the trading session. This 
confirms the theoretical proposition that the trading of insi ders at precise moments reflect the importance of private 
information. More precisely, the assertion that the increas e in transaction costs depends on the occurrence of the 
problem of asymmetric information. This group of inform ed and uninformed investors at specific times of trading

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 161
day contributes to the development of a theoretical explanation of different types of intraday pattern. These patterns 
depend mainly on high liquidity and low cost of information asymmetry. 
Another theoretical explanation has been advanced by Brock and Kleiden (1992) on the reasons of the emergence of 
seasonality in trading day. They developed a model show ing that the demand for transactions at the opening and 
closing of the market is high and less elastic than other tim es of trading day. They trie d to answer a very important 
question: why are transactions bent on opening and closing of the market? They focused their analysis on the 
necessity to rebalance the portfolio of actions at the opening and closing of the trading session by investors.First, the 
accumulation of information is made the ni ght after market closure, ie during periods of non-transaction, generating 
a deviation from the optimal position. This situation obliges investors to increase their transaction at the opening of 
the market order to arrive at the optimum position and reach equilibrium of their portfolio. Second, before moving to 
the non-transaction period, the optimal position at the end is different from the optimal position during the trading 
day, forcing investors to increase their transaction at the end to achieve an optimal position.

ction period, the optimal position at the end is different from the optimal position during the trading 
day, forcing investors to increase their transaction at the end to achieve an optimal position. Their model shows that 
the grouping of transactions at the opening and closing for the goal in order to rebalance the portfolio that can lead 
to U-shaped profile. Kleiden Brock (1992) showed that the occurrence of seasonality in session is caused by the 
monopoly power of market makers and especially their willingness to have an optimal position at the close of the 
trading day before receiving informati on during the transaction and also to th e inelastic demand of investors. They 
developed a model showing that market makers have filled their monopoly and exploit the inelastic demand of 
investors for making transactions at the opening and closing by increasing the bid ask spread.The main result of 
Brock and Kleiden (1992) was that seasonality depends main ly on the investor needs to rebalance their optimal 
positions. However, it should be noted that these authors have inspired their explanation the following lessons: First, 
the trading volume follows a U-pattern throughout the tr ading day.Second, the trading volume and liquidity are 
positively correlated due to the relentless demand for liquidity at the opening and closing of the market. In addition, 
the bid ask spread follows a U-pattern similarly to the tr ading volume. Third, the volatility is not correlated with

ess demand for liquidity at the opening and closing of the market. In addition, 
the bid ask spread follows a U-pattern similarly to the tr ading volume. Third, the volatility is not correlated with 
trading volume and liquidity because the information flow is constant and does not follow "intraday pattern». Indeed, 
with the arrival of new information during the period of non-transaction, the portfolio that is optimal during the 
closure of the preceding trading day will be suboptimal when the new session will begin. Therefore trading activity 
increases immediately after the opening since investors can attempt to rebalance their portfolios. 
4. Description of the Market, the Dataset, Definition of Variables 
4.1 Presentation of BVMT 
The Tunisian Stock Exchange is a priv ate organization whose the shareholders are the stock market intermediaries. 
It is the enterprise that manages the stock market. Its operation is subject to control by the council of Financial 
Markets (CMF). The BVMT is a centralized market and governed by the orders because the investment can be 
achieved only through the br okers. Trading of shares takes place th rough quotation system developed by the 
Euronext group. Purchase orders and sales orders introduced in this system will be confronted depending on the 
degree of liquidity in two ways: The less liquid stocks ar e quoted according to the au ction mode. The most liquid 
stocks are quoted according to the continuous mode.

be confronted depending on the 
degree of liquidity in two ways: The less liquid stocks ar e quoted according to the au ction mode. The most liquid 
stocks are quoted according to the continuous mode. The BVMT is organized by the Law No. 94-117 of November 
14
th, 1994 on the reorganization of the financial market. But this legislation is inadequate for the development of 
BVMT, which motivated BVMT authorities to modify the Law No. 99-92 of August 17 th, 1999 on the recovery of 
financial market. In the same context, there is the law No. 2005-96 of October 18 th ,2005 on the strengthening of 
Financial Security. This law is an extension of the legislative reforms introduced by the financial authorities to 
strengthen financial transparency in the Tunisian stock ma rket. Besides the legal reforms, there are other reforms in 
the Tunisian Stock Exchange. These include the introduc tion of an electronic trading system called SUPER-CAC 
UNIX in October 25
th, 1996. This system is managed by a central computer which makes the comparison of 
purchase orders and sales orders. On December 3rd, 2007, the Tunisian Stock Exchange launched the new version of 
the electronic trading system V900 developed by Atos Euronext. All these reforms have focused on the development 
of the Tunisian Stock Exchange to enhance the stock market, to increase the trading activity and to restore the 
investor confidence that will be reflected by the liquidity evolution.

the development 
of the Tunisian Stock Exchange to enhance the stock market, to increase the trading activity and to restore the 
investor confidence that will be reflected by the liquidity evolution. The trading day in the Tunisian stock market 
pre-opens from 9 am to 10 am. During this period, the purchase orders and sales orders are entered without giving 
effect to the transactions. As soon as the market is open, the system determines an opening price that will be used 
only to transactions by the opening auction at 10 am. After opening and during the continuous session that lasts from 
10 am to 2 pm, the introduction of an order in the system can generate an instantaneous transaction when there is an 
opposite order. 
4.2 Data 
In this study, we analyze the intraday behavior of tradi ng activity, volatility and liquidity of stocks in the Tunisian 
stock market. Our sample includes 38 shares that have a continuous trading for a period of 9 months spanning the 
beginning of October 2008 to the end of June 2009. It consists of a database composed of two intraday files: a

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 162
trading file and quotation file. The tran saction file contains intraday trans action prices and quantities next to the 
code of each stock on the transaction system, the date and transaction time. The second file represents the set of 
limit orders purchases and sales next to the code of each purchase order and sale order, the date and time entry of the 
order, the ASK price, the BID price entered by the intermediary stock exchange and the quantity appropriate for 
each ASK price and BID price. However, it should be noted that the constraints have made our task difficult in order 
to constitute our final database: at this level, we must me ntion the narrowness of the Tunisian secondary market and 
especially the problem of illiquidity of certain listed securitie s.The choice of this period in our study is justified by 
the recovery of Tunindex index in the first half of 2009, of its performance compared to the final quarter of 2008. It 
was able to achieve its level of September 2008 at the end of April 2009. To attain the final list of our study, we 
conducted several stages of filtering Initially, the list contai ns 50 stocks However, we exclude 12 shares listed on 
fixing since at this level, the law of supply and demand is not involved in this quotation type. Table 1 contains the 
final list of securities in our study.

s However, we exclude 12 shares listed on 
fixing since at this level, the law of supply and demand is not involved in this quotation type. Table 1 contains the 
final list of securities in our study. It provides the code and identification name of the 38 shares quoted continuously 
in the Tunisian stock market as well as the sectors they belong to. In addition, we determined the descriptive 
statistics of our sample. The details of this descriptive analysis are presented in Table 2.To conduct our research, this 
table shows that the daily average of trading volume per sessi on during our retained period is about 34 transactions. 
The average number of transactions traded per day is 17,506 . In addition, it is clear that the number of sale orders 
exceeds the number of purchase orders. Th e total amount of transactions perfor med during the period of study was 
121 399 567. The total maximum quantity negotiated is 20163175 (Attijari Bank) while the total minimum quantity 
negotiated is 119,409 (BTE-ADP). 
4.3 The Determination of Variables 
4.3.1 The return : Generally, we begin our analysis by the calculation of Stock return. From the transaction file, we 
are applying the following formula on the series of transaction prices of 38 securities traded continuously in order to 
measure geometrically the rate of return . The geometric rate of return is used in our study because several previous

e series of transaction prices of 38 securities traded continuously in order to 
measure geometrically the rate of return . The geometric rate of return is used in our study because several previous 
studies have adopted it.This authorizes us to compare our results with those from other studies. 
R
୲ ൌ ሾ100 ∗ ሺLnሺP୲ሻ െL nሺP୲ିଵሻሻሿ ( 1 ) 
with: R୲: Represents the return on stock i in interval t, P୲ : Represents the closing price of stock i in interval t. P୲ିଵ : 
Represents the closing price of stock i in interval t-1 
4.3.2 The trading volume: Likewise to the return, the trading volume indicates the number of shares traded on each 
interval. We can measure it by this formula. The reason for using the natural logarithm is to normalize this variable 
so as not to fall into fallacious estimates. 
V୲ ൌ ሾ100 ∗ LnሺNAE୲ሻሿ ( 2 ) 
With: V୲: Represents the trading volume of stock i in interval t. NAE୲ : NAB: Represents th e number of shares 
traded for stock i in interval t. 
4.3.3 The return volatility: To proxy return volatility, th e squared values of intraday stock returns are used. 
Brailsford (1996) employed the squared as volatility proxies for the Australian stock market. 
Rଶ ൌ ሾR୲ ∗R ୲ሿ ( 3 ) 
4.3.4 The quoted spread: The difference between the best of limited price for sale and the best of limited price of 
purchase represents the quoted spread. 
QSPR୲ ൌ ሾሺP୆ሻ െ ሺP୅ሻሿ ሺ4ሻ 
with: 
 
 
QSPR
୲: The quoted spread in the interval t.

between the best of limited price for sale and the best of limited price of 
purchase represents the quoted spread. 
QSPR୲ ൌ ሾሺP୆ሻ െ ሺP୅ሻሿ ሺ4ሻ 
with: 
 
 
QSPR
୲: The quoted spread in the interval t. P୆: The best limit price to buy (BID) of the interval t. P୅ : The best limit 
price to sell (ASK) of the interval t. 
4.3.5 The Depth: The depth indicates the quantity available for the purchase and sale, for each price level at a given 
instant. 
 DEP୲ ൌ ሺQ୆ ൅Q ୅ሻ
2 ሺ5ሻ 
With : DEP୲: Depth in the interval t. Q୆ : The quantity available at the purchase price in the interval t. Q୅ : The 
quantity available at the selling price in the interval t. Once all the series of all variables are determined, we need to 
construct a cross-sectional database. To do this, Abhyanker et al (1997) have presented an empirical methodology to 
achieve this aim. For each time interval t (t = 1 ... .24). We compute the weighted average for all shares i (i = 1...38)

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 163
through all the trading sessions j (j = 1 ...184). The study of the seasonal anomaly in the Tunisian stock market will 
be investigated as soon as the cross-sectional database is created. 
5. Methodology and Empirical Results 
Our study is inspired of the Vo (2007) study on the Toronto stock market. At this level, the availability of 
high-frequency data on the Tunisian stock market especially after the implementation of the Financial Security Law 
in 2005 motivated us to use this data to analyze profou ndly the seasonal liquidity, volatility and trading activity and 
especially to study the different co rrelations between the micro structur al aggregates. However, before we 
implement our methodology, we, first, try to identify the variables necessary to respond to our research questions. 
The achievement of the importance of intraday analysis of the seasonal anomaly requires the division of trading day 
in equal intervals of time. The application of this empirical approach of our sample allows us to divide the trading 
day from 10 am to 2 pm over 24 intervals and retain a samp ling interval of 10 minutes each. Indeed, the analysis of 
seasonality requires, first of all, the determination and definition of variables in our study. 
5.1 Testable Hypothesis

and retain a samp ling interval of 10 minutes each. Indeed, the analysis of 
seasonality requires, first of all, the determination and definition of variables in our study. 
5.1 Testable Hypothesis 
In this section, we investigate the intraday behavior of trading activity, volatility and liquidity. To do this, we 
analyze graphically all variables in order to finalize with the estimation of models. Table 3 refers to the standardized 
average values for all variables of 38 securities for each time interval during the trading day. To accomplish our 
detailed analysis of the regularities in the Tunisian stock market, we needed to formulate the following hypotheses. 
The market efficiency hypothesis considers that the stock prices include all th e information available on the market. 
Indeed, this hypothesis supports the idea that the variables of liquidity and transactions are constant throughout the 
trading day. So our approach is based on the following hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 1: The evolution of variables of trading activity, return volatility and liquidity are constant during the 
trading day. 
Hypothesis 2: The evolution of variables of trading activity, return volatility and liquidity are not constant during 
the trading day. At this level, we w ill attempt to test these hypotheses on the Tunisian stock market in order to 
analyze the evolution of different variables. It would certainly be interesting to follow an empirical process based 
upon two paths.

test these hypotheses on the Tunisian stock market in order to 
analyze the evolution of different variables. It would certainly be interesting to follow an empirical process based 
upon two paths. 
5.2 The Graphical Analysis of Intraday Behavior of the Trading Activity, Return Volatility and Liquidity 
It is therefore appropriate to start with a graphical analysis that is important for viewing the behavior of different 
variables in the Tunisian stock market. Table 3 presents the cross-sectional average of standardized return, 
standardized trading volume, Standardized return volatility, standardized quoted spread and standardized depth for 
each interval of 10 minutes of the trading day. The following figures sh ow the evolution of liquidity and trading 
activity over time in the Tunisian stock market. 
From the visualization of different figures, we can observe that the figure 1 displays the intraday movements of 
return during the trading day. It reveals that the intraday behavior of return follows almost the U-Pattern. During the 
first minutes of trading, the return attained a high level that is equal to 2,049. This return decreases and varies 
between -1 and 1 throughout th e trading day. At the end of quotation, it achieved a peak that reaches 3,451. Hence, 
the confirmation of our second hypothesis. Certainly, we ca n say that this result coincides with the results shown on

ng day. At the end of quotation, it achieved a peak that reaches 3,451. Hence, 
the confirmation of our second hypothesis. Certainly, we ca n say that this result coincides with the results shown on 
the order-driven market (Bildik (2001)).Second, the trading volume is globally variable in the day. Figure 2 also 
highlights that the configuration of intraday trading volume is in U and more precisely in W. We notice, however, a 
high trading volume over the first ten minutes of the session quotation as well as a strong increase at the close of the 
day. However we find in the middle of the day that the trading volume comes to decrease after the first interval in 
order to increase again until reaching the value 1 at 11:30 am . This persistence of the gr owth of the trading volume 
has been interrupted and has declined again. Third, figure 3 shows clearly that the intraday behavior of return 
volatility follows the shape U. We observe that high return volatility exists at the beginning of the session quotation. 
However this volatility has declined rapidly and continues to decrease throughout the day in order to pick up again 
in the last ten minutes. The latter result is consistent with the results of Ahn, Bae and Chan (2001).In addition, the 
figure 4 shows that the quoted spread also follows the U- shaped profile. We notice that the spread is high at the 
beginning of the market followed by a reduction during the two following intervals. During the trading day, the

d spread also follows the U- shaped profile. We notice that the spread is high at the 
beginning of the market followed by a reduction during the two following intervals. During the trading day, the 
liquidity has decreased again except a sli ght reduction at the level of interval 15 to regain on the rise to the market 
close. This finding of U-shap ed profile coincides with the results of C hung et al (1999) on the NYSE and those of 
Vo (2007) on the TSE. Finally, the visualization of the figure 5 provides information on the intraday behavior of 
depth. This figure also supports the U-shaped profile. But this profile is different compar ed to the profile of the 
quoted spread. The depth was high at the beginning of the session, and then decreases throughout the trading day

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 164
and it is growing during the last half hour before the closure of negotiations. This showed U-shape in the Tunisian 
stock market is consistent with the proven results on the NYSE by Lee, Mucklow, and Ready (1993) and on the 
Paris stock exchange by Biais et al (1995) and the SEH justified by Ahn et al (2001). 
However, the question asked here is to know whether our proposed hypotheses in accordance with the theory of 
efficiency have been confirmed or not. In the first stage, the evolutions profiles show that the Tunisian stock market 
is liquid at the beginning of quotation, since we find that the spread and the depth at the best limit are very high 
during the first 10 minutes in order to decrease during the next 20 minutes. While during the trading day, the 
Tunisian stock market is illiquid since the price dimension of liquidity (quoted spread) increased while the quantity 
dimension (the depth at the best limit) is down. But the observation of the profiles confirms the finding of a upward 
trend of market liquidity during the last 30 minutes of quotations. It is clear that the spread and depth at the best 
limit are very high at the end of quota tions. This change in liquidity at the Tunisian stock market tends to confirm 
the presence of anomaly of seasonality.

that the spread and depth at the best 
limit are very high at the end of quota tions. This change in liquidity at the Tunisian stock market tends to confirm 
the presence of anomaly of seasonality. 
In a next phase, we observe an intrad ay evolution very similar of trading activity with that of liquidity. A possible 
interpretation, consistent with the results obtained here would be that the hypothesis 2 presented above was accepted 
either for liquidity variables or trading activity variables. These results coincide with the results shown by several 
empirical studies such as studies of Jain and Joh (1988), Foster and Viswanathan (1993), Jang and Lee (1993) on the 
NYSE and Chan, Christie and Schultz (1995) on the NASDAQ. For this, the question that arises at this level, why 
do these patterns exist ? It is necessary to submit briefly th e explanations justifying the presence of this seasonality 
in liquidity and trading activity in the Tunisian stock market. We will build our analysis on two theoretical 
foundations: the adverse selection theory and inventory theory. Initially, the simultaneous analysis of the spread and 
depth will doubtlessly allow us to have a better comprehensive view on the supply of liquidity in the order book. 
However, the primary objective of investors is to position itself in an optimal way on the market and rebalance their 
portfolios by increasing the spread and decreasing the depth in order to cope with the risk of adverse selection.

investors is to position itself in an optimal way on the market and rebalance their 
portfolios by increasing the spread and decreasing the depth in order to cope with the risk of adverse selection. 
However, our results showed that the spread and the depth have the same behavior at the opening and closing 
trading. In other words, there is an improving liquidity du ring the first minutes and last-minute of quotation. At the 
opening, the improving liquidity can be attributed to the intense competition between the agents of limit orders that 
place orders rapi dly such that they are ex ecuted in order to sear ch the profitable opportun ities although the risk of 
detention of private information by informed investors is very important. Furthermore, this result does not agree 
with the hypothesis of asymmetric information that requires an illiquid market at the opening. Whereas at closing we 
observe an increase of two dimensions of liquidity. This change in the degree of liquidity at the closing might be 
explained by the need for investors to have an optimal inventory position, and especially to execute them by the 
price closing .But as from 10:30 a.m. we notice a deterioration in liquidity as investors become more conservative 
due to the increasing the risk of adverse selection. This prudence is reflected in a higher spread and low depth This 
transaction strategy adopted by the underwriters to limit orders appears very different to that adopted in other 
markets.

election. This prudence is reflected in a higher spread and low depth This 
transaction strategy adopted by the underwriters to limit orders appears very different to that adopted in other 
markets. 
In a second step, we are proposing to analyze and explain the dynamics of intraday trading activity. The results have 
shown that the Tunisian stoc k market is characterized by a concentrati on of trading volume at the opening and 
closing of the trading session. While inside the trading da y, trading volume has remarkably declined. This U-shaped 
profile, according to Lee, Fok and Liu (2001), represents a global phenomenon, since several studies have revealed 
the presence of such intraday behavior as the works of Wood, McInish and Ord (1985), McInish and Wood (1990a), 
McInish and Wood (1992) and Lockwood and Linn (1990) respectively on the NYSE and the TSE. And the works 
of Chow, Lee, Liu (1994) and Liu (1994), Ho and Cheung (1991), as well as Ho Cheung and Cheung (1993) 
respectively on Taiwan stock market and SEHK. Jain and Joh (1988) have justified the high level of trading activity 
precisely at the opening by the willingness of investors to exploit the collected information the eve and before the 
opening of the market in order to achieve their transactions. Admati and Pfleiderer (1988) suggest that uninformed 
investors react together to make transactions to limit the informational advantage of insiders. For their part,

r to achieve their transactions. Admati and Pfleiderer (1988) suggest that uninformed 
investors react together to make transactions to limit the informational advantage of insiders. For their part, 
informed investors attempt to exploit their private inform ation and make transactions at the opening before this 
information becomes public. Brock and Kleidon (1992) provide an important explanation for this anomaly. They 
show that investors exploit the advent of new information and make transactions at the opening and closing of the 
market for the objective of rebalancing their portfolios. Next to the profile of trad ing activity, the U-profiles of 
return and return volatility may be allocated to the in creased important accumulation of information the eve and 
before the opening of the Tunisian stock market. These results imply that the collected information (public or private) 
will be immediately and implicitly incorporated into stock prices since the market opening. Our results coincided 
with the results of Wood et al (1985), Harris (1986), Jain and Joh (1988) on the NYSE, Copeland and Jones (2002) 
on the Korean market. But it must be mentioned that the attr ibution of high levels of return and return volatility at

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 165
the opening and closing quotation in the Tunisian stock market, is only due to the information flow, is insufficient. 
Since the previous literature has shown the existence of a very important f actor generating this anomaly. Amihud 
and Mendelson (1987), Stoll Whaley (1990) have highlighted the importance of trading in fixing on the return and 
volatility. They have shown that the return and the volatility calculated on the basis of price fixing are high during 
the first minutes and the last minutes of trading. 
5.3 The Empirical Analysis of the Regularities of Intraday Trading Activity, Volatility and Liquidity 
The graphical analysis has shown the presence of the anomaly of seasonality in the Tunisian stock market. It 
therefore seemed interesting to adopt and to estimate the sa me methodological approach of Vo (2007) to verify this 
result. To test the significance of different patterns of liquidity, volatility and trading activity, standardized variables 
are regressed on a set of dummy variab les representing the intraday interval s. The following parameters of the 
model are estimated by using OLS. 
ܴܦܵ
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ6ሻ 
 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ7ሻ 
 
௧
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ8ሻ 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ9ሻ 
 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ10ሻ 
Where, SDR୲ ; SDV୲; SDR ୲
ଶ; SDSPR ୲; SDDepth ୲ represent standardized variables of return, volatility, trading

ܦܵ
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ6ሻ 
 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ7ሻ 
 
௧
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ8ሻ 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ9ሻ 
 
௧
௡
௞ୀଵ
௧ ሺ10ሻ 
Where, SDR୲ ; SDV୲; SDR ୲
ଶ; SDSPR ୲; SDDepth ୲ represent standardized variables of return, volatility, trading 
volume , spread and depth in the interval generating t. n is the number of intervals in the trading day with n ranging 
from 1 to 24. D
୲ are dummies variables equal to 1 if the observation t occurs in the interval k, 0 else. In addition, 
our sample is over 30. Above all, we estimate different equations for each stock market using the OLS estimation 
method. Thus, we exploit the t-statistics that is consistent against heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation in order to 
justify the significance of estimated parameters. 
The estimation results are reported in Table 4. We are finding that the return is high at the beginning of the market 
since αଵ is statistically significant and positive and very s uperior to the other success ive coefficients. But this 
decreasing trend throughout the day did not last long in order to achieve its high level at the closing of market. This 
result is translated by an increase of coeffi cient values during the last thirty minutes ( α
ଶସ > αଶଷ > αଶଶ ). Statistical 
significance and the positivity of these coefficients absolute ly confirm the result that the return reaches its higher 
level at the end of the trading day. It is no surprise from the above that our results maintain the results generated by 
graphical analysis.

ly confirm the result that the return reaches its higher 
level at the end of the trading day. It is no surprise from the above that our results maintain the results generated by 
graphical analysis. In addition, we use the unconditional correlation as a measure of the degree of liaison between all 
the variables in our study. The observation of the uncond itional correlation matrix confirms the presence of a very 
high positive correlation between the return with other variables (the trading volume (0,99 and 0,98), the return 
volatility (0,95 and 0,99), the spread (0,80 and 0,99) and the depth (0,64 and 0,97)) respectively during the first three 
intervals and the last day of trading. For the trading volume we notice that it reaches a high level at the beginning 
and closing of the market since the results have shown that coefficients α
ଵ and αଶସ are statistically significant and 
positive and superior to other dummy coefficients estimated in the model (9). This also confirms the result shown by 
the graph of the trading volume profile. Similarly to the trading volume, we also observe that the return volatility is 
significantly high in the first and last minutes of the trading session. This is reflected by the significance and positive 
coefficients α
ଵ and αଶସ and more specifically their superiority compared with other coefficients. 
According to the above, we can mention that there is a positive relationship between trading volume and return

α
ଵ and αଶସ and more specifically their superiority compared with other coefficients. 
According to the above, we can mention that there is a positive relationship between trading volume and return 
volatility during the first minutes and the last minutes of trading day. This finding corresponds to the theoretical

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 166
proposition of Admati and Pfleiderer (1988) that periods of high trading volume tend to be periods of high return 
volatility. According to Easley and O'Hara (1992), we can also explain this situation by the fact that a high trading 
volume represents an indication of the arrival of insiders on the market. This will increas e the risk of transactions 
with investors and especially the probability of achieving losses and therefore the opportunity to observe high levels 
of the return volatility during these periods. The analysis is thus clearer regarding the interpretation of the 
correlation matrix. Indeed, the results have shown the unconditional positive correlation between trading volume 
and return volatility (0, 96 and 0, 99) respectively for the first and last three intervals during the trading session. 
For the dimensions of liquidity, the regression results have shown that the spread is characterized by a high level at 
the opening and closing of the market compared to the inside of the trading day. The values of estimated coefficients 
confirm our results of a U-shape since we have observed that the coefficient α
ଵ is statistically insignificant and 
negative but higher than the coefficients αଶଶ and αଶଷ that are significant. Similarly, the coefficient αଶସ is 
significant and positive.

ed that the coefficient α
ଵ is statistically insignificant and 
negative but higher than the coefficients αଶଶ and αଶଷ that are significant. Similarly, the coefficient αଶସ is 
significant and positive. It attained a hi gh level compared to the coefficients αଶଶ and αଶଷ. To understand this 
phenomenon, we can deduce the existence of a direct relationship between the return volatility and the spread for the 
opening and closing of the market. Foucault (1999) justified this nature of relationship with the demonstration that 
when the market is volatile, the probability to encounter insiders increases, which w ill increase the losses of the 
uninformed investors. To resolve this pr oblem, they try to place limit orders to buy at low prices and limit orders to 
sell at high prices. This investment strategy generates a higher spread. For depth, we have found that the coefficient 
α
ଵ is significant and positive. This means that this quantity dimension of liquidity is extremely high during the first 
minutes of trading. But this increasi ng trend does not long remain in order to decrease during the trading day 
(αଵ ൐α ଶ > αଷ ൐α ସ > αହ ൐α ଺ > α଻ ൐α ଼ > αଽ ൐α ଵ଴ > αଵହ ൐α ଵ଺ > αଵ଻ ൐α ଵ଼ > αଵଽ>αଶ଴ ൐α ଶଵ). Yet during the 
last minutes of trading, we noticed that liquidity is characterized by a remarkable increase. This behavior is reflected 
by the significance and negativity a nd especially the superiority of αଶସ compared to αଶଶ and αଶଷ. The most

iced that liquidity is characterized by a remarkable increase. This behavior is reflected 
by the significance and negativity a nd especially the superiority of αଶସ compared to αଶଶ and αଶଷ. The most 
surprising from the above is that although the high level of volatility at the opening and closing of the market, 
liquidity seekers do not hesitate to increase their spread but in return they retain high levels of the depth at the best 
limit. Similarly to the trading volume, we also notice, from the unconditional correlation matrix, that there is a 
positive correlation of the return volatility with the spread (0.94 and 0.99) and depth at the best limit (0.83 and 0.98) 
respectively during the first three and last intervals of th e transaction day. This result does not coincide with the 
explanation of Foucault (1999) that the strategic behavior of the Agents of limit orders for these active periods is the 
increase of the spread and reducing of the depth at the best limit in order to protect against the risks mentioned 
above. The justification that we can offer is that the need for liquidity and rebalanceing the optimal portfolio 
requires such applicant’s liquidity to adopt this strategy . We apply reconciliation between intraday behavior of the 
depth and trading volume. Our results have shown the existence of high level of depth accompanied by a high level 
of trading volume. This result was confirmed by the pres ence of a very high positive correlation between trading

results have shown the existence of high level of depth accompanied by a high level 
of trading volume. This result was confirmed by the pres ence of a very high positive correlation between trading 
volume and the two dimensions of liquidity (the spread (0.82 and 0.98) and depth at the best limit (0.66 and 0.99)) 
for the first and last half hour of the trading day. We think that this result is different from that shown by Lee et al. 
(1993), Ye (1995) and Kavajecz (1999). They have proven that during these tr ading periods, the trading volume is 
characterized by a high concentration when the depth reaches a low level. Indeed, this explanation implies more 
than the strategic actions of the applicants of liquidity represent the main source to have this type of relationship. In 
addition, the high level of spread and depth at the beginning and the end of the session shows that investors do not 
take into consideration the risk of non-execution of their orders whose objective is to have very advantageous 
position in the market in order face competition with other suppliers of liquidity. Theref ore, the extension of two 
dimensions of liquidity is verified by the existence of positive unconditional correlation between spread and depth at 
the best limit. 
5.4 The Spectral Analysis of the Behavior of Intraday Trading Activity, Return Volatility and Liquidity 
After having applied the graphical and empirical analysis, the next step consists of applying the spectrum analysis.

is of the Behavior of Intraday Trading Activity, Return Volatility and Liquidity 
After having applied the graphical and empirical analysis, the next step consists of applying the spectrum analysis. 
The Fourier series development is founded on the principle that every periodic function of time x(t) can be 
decomposed into an infinite sum of sines and cosines of which frequencies start at zero and increase in integer 
multiples of a basic frequency f
଴ = 1/T, where T is the period of x(t). To account for time series, we decompose the 
process x(t)in periodic components by adopting the criteria of frequencies. In fact the Fourier transformation is one 
of the methods frequently used in spectral analysis. The Fourier transformation has already been considered as a 
particular mathematical case of Laplace transformation. Th is method can automatically detect the seasonality and 
more specifically to analyze the frequency of the process x(t). In other words, the Fourier transform can be used to 
diagnose the periodic structures in time series data. It transforms an original function which is often a periodic 
function into another, which is called the frequency domain representing the original function. According to the 
Fourier theorem, any time series can be formulated as the sum of sines and cosines of different frequencies and

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 167
magnitudes. The Fourier transform allows decomposing a series t X (t=1….n). We can write the Fourier 
development as follows: 
௞
ஶ
௞ୀଵ
ሻሻ ሺ11ሻ 
By knowing the basic frequency and the function x (t), the achievement of a Four ier transform consists in 
determining all values αk and b kthat make up the series. The Fourier transform adopts another form that can be 
represented by the following function: 
ି௜௪௧
ାஶ
ିஶ
ሺ12ሻ 
The inverse Fourier transformation is as follows: 
௜௪௧
ାஶ
ିஶ
ሺ13ሻ 
We had necessary to use Matlab in order to apply the spectrum analysis of the various series. However, the spectrum 
analysis has allowed us to appreciate the existence of seasona lity and especially to take part in the determination of 
the appropriate pattern for all variables mentioned above. The application of Fourier transform (FFT) confirms our 
results proven above. To illustrate this point, we figure the results of the application of spectrum analysis on all 
variables by graphics with the abscissa and the ordinate respectively the frequency and the magnitude. These 
specters show clearly the existence of seasonality that is manifested by significant spectral peaks in seasonal 
frequencies at the opening and closing trading days reflecti ng a seasonal effect which characterizes all variables of 
liquidity, volatility and trading activity.

nificant spectral peaks in seasonal 
frequencies at the opening and closing trading days reflecti ng a seasonal effect which characterizes all variables of 
liquidity, volatility and trading activity. 
This type of frequential analysis is generally used to prove that a signal has the dominant frequencies: when we 
represent the spectra, we see that ther e were some significant peaks, indica ting that the signal possesses a certain 
periodicity in the corresponding frequencies. Figure 6 illust rates the spectrum of the series standardized return. We 
find that there exists a significant peak at the opening trading day with a magnitude of 5.771 and a frequency of 
0.001667 KHz and another significant peak at the end of the day with magnitude of 5.771 but frequency of 0.05167 
kHz. Indeed, the series of return analyzed and presente d two remarkable periodicities when frequencies present a 
remarkable peak. Similarly, the results illustrated in Figure 7 for the spectrum of standardized trading volume, 
showed that there were some large fluctuations at the start of trading session with a magnitude of 15,06 and a 
frequency of 0,001667 KHz and also at the end of trading for a magnitude of 15,06 but the frequency of 0,5167 KHz. 
The analysis of the frequential evolution of standardized return volatility illustrated in figure 8, indicates that the 
presented series is characterized by a considerable variability since there is a significant peak at the beginning of the

standardized return volatility illustrated in figure 8, indicates that the 
presented series is characterized by a considerable variability since there is a significant peak at the beginning of the 
trading session with a magnitude of 17, 57 and a frequency of 0,001667 KHz and another significant peak at the end 
of the day with a magnitude 17, 57 and frequency of 0, 5167 KHz. 
Regarding the dimensions of liquidity, Figure 9 illustrates the spectrum of the standardized quoted spread. We also 
found that there is a great variability justified by significa nt peak at the opening of trading day with magnitude 18, 
86 and frequency of 0,001667 KHz and another significant peak at the close of the day with magnitude but a 
frequencyof 0, 05167 KHz. For the other dimension of liquidity, it is clear from Figure 10, that the spectrum 
analysis of the depth confirms the existence of significant peak at the opening with a magnitude 31,24 and a 
frequency of 0,5167 KHz and another significant peak at the close with a magnitude 31,24 and frequency of 0,5167 
KHz. 
Finally, our showed results in this study are important in both theoretical and applied implications. On the 
theoretical level, our study agreed with the theory of microstructure and more precisely with the theoretical 
explanation of the presence of an anomal y in the financial market by asymmetric information. On the applied level,

agreed with the theory of microstructure and more precisely with the theoretical 
explanation of the presence of an anomal y in the financial market by asymmetric information. On the applied level, 
our results can build an appropriate analysis to investors to be able to implement their strategies of speculation. 
More precisely, speculation is characterized by taking a risky position on a placement to invest on the future 
evolution of stock in order to accomplish capital gains. Indeed, investors, through their knowledge of the seasonal 
pattern characterizing trading activity, return volatility and liquidity, may react and achieve transactions for the 
adequate moments they want. 
6. Conclusion 
We have attempted in this paper to clarify the intraday behavior of liquidity, volatility and trading activity in 
financial markets. The existence of seasonality characterized this behavior which will contradict the hypothesis of 
market efficiency. The previous literature has shown the ex istence of this micro-struct ural anomaly since the study

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 168
of Wood, Mc Inish and Ord (1985). The majority of these studies showed that the trading volume, return volatility 
and liquidity profile follow the U-shaped. All these variables are at the highest le vel at the opening of trading, they 
decline rapidly to lower levels lower in the middle and then they increase again during the final minutes of trading. 
We have tried to verify the existence of seasonality in trading activity, volatility and liquidity, and especially to 
show the reasons for this anomaly in the Tunisian stock ma rket: a market governed by the orders. To achieve this 
goal, we have used a sample of high-frequency data for a period which runs from October 2008 until June 2009. We 
have applied two methods: the temporal analysis is to es timate a dichotomic model for each variable by following 
the methodological approach of Vo (2007) and the second method is to apply the spectrum analysis by using the 
Fourier Transform fast (FFT). The results have shown that all identified variables are characterized by a notable 
seasonality justified the rejection of the hypothesis of constancy (H0). Both methods have shown the existence a 
seasonal pattern in U. The reason cons idered to justify this intraday behavi or is the crucial role played by the

ction of the hypothesis of constancy (H0). Both methods have shown the existence a 
seasonal pattern in U. The reason cons idered to justify this intraday behavi or is the crucial role played by the 
problem of adverse selection especially between the two dimensions of liquidity: the spread and the depth at the best 
limit. We should also note that the effect of inventory management on the optimal allocation of the portfolio. 
References 
Abhyankar, A., Ghosh, D., Levin, E., & Limmack, R.J. (1997). Bid-Ask spreads, trading volume and volatility: 
Intraday evidence from th e London Stock Exchange. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting , 24(3/4). 
343-362. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1468-5957.00108 
Admati, A.R., & Pfleiderer, P. ( 1988). A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price Variability. Review of 
Financial Studies, 1, 3-40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/1.1.3 
Admati, A.R., & Pfleiderer, P. (1989). Divide and conquer: a theory of intraday and day-of-the-week effects. Review 
of Financial Studies, 2, 189-223. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/2.2.189 
Ahn, H., & Cheung, Y-L. (1999). The intraday patterns of the spread and depth in a market without market makers: 
The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 7, 539–556. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0927-538X(99)00023-2 
Ahn, H., Bae, K., & Chan, K. (2001). Limit orders, depth, and volatility: Evidence from the stock exchange of Hong 
Kong. Journal of Finance, 56, 767−788.

p://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0927-538X(99)00023-2 
Ahn, H., Bae, K., & Chan, K. (2001). Limit orders, depth, and volatility: Evidence from the stock exchange of Hong 
Kong. Journal of Finance, 56, 767−788. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00345 
Amihud, Y., & Mendelson, H. (1987). Trading mechanisms and stock returns: an empirical investigation. Journal of 
finance, 42, 533-553. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328369 
Andersen, T. (1996). Return volatility and trading volume: an information flow interpretation of stochastic volatility. 
Journal of Finance, 51, 169-204. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329306 
Barclay, M.J., Litzenberger, R.H., & Wa rner, J.B. (1990). Private information, trading volume, and stock-return 
variances. Review of Financial Studies, 3, 233-253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/3.2.233 
Biais, B., Hillion, P., & Spatt, C. (1995). An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order flow in the 
Paris bourse. Journal of Finance, 50, 1655−1689. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329330 
Bildik, R. (2001).Intra-day seasonalities on stock returns : evidence from the Turkish stock market. Emerging 
Market Review, 2, 387-417. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1566-0141(01)00026-7 
Brailsford, T. J. (1996) .The empirical relations hip between trading volume, returns and volatility. Accounting and 
Finance, 
36, 89–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-629X.1996.tb00300.x 
Brock, W., & Kleidon, A. (1992).

The empirical relations hip between trading volume, returns and volatility. Accounting and 
Finance, 
36, 89–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-629X.1996.tb00300.x 
Brock, W., & Kleidon, A. (1992). Periodic market closure and trading volume: A model of intraday bids and asks. 
Journal of Economic Dynamic and Control, 16, 451−489. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0165-1889(92)90045-G 
Brockman, P., & Chung, D.Y. (1998). Inter- and Intra-day Liquidity Patterns on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong. 
Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money , 8, 279–300. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1042-4431(98)00040-7 
Brockman, P., & Chung, D.Y. (1999). An Analysis of Depth Behavior in an Electronic, Order-Driven Environment. 
Journal of Banking and Finance, 23, 1861–1886. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4266(99)00044-8 
Brockman, P., & Chung, D.Y. (2001). Managerial Timing and Corporate Liquidity: Evidence from Actual Share 
Repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics, 61, 417-448. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-405X(01)00068-X 
Chan, K. C., Christie, W. G., & Schultz, P. H. (1995). Mark et structure and the intraday pattern of bid-ask spreads 
for Nasdaq securities. Journal of Business, 68, 35−60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/296652

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 169
Chan, K., Chung, Y. P., & Johnson, H. (1993). Why Option Prices Lag Stock Prices: A Trading Based Explanation. 
Journal of Finance, 48,1957-1968. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329075 
Chen, M., Chow, E. H., Liu, V. W., & Liu, J. Y. J. (199 4). Intraday Stock Returns of Taiwan: An Examination of 
Transaction Data. National Central University, Working Paper, pp. 1-45. 
Cheung, S.C., & Kwan, C. Y. (1992). A Note on the Transm ission of Public Information across International Stock 
Markets. Journal of Banking and Finance, 16, 831-837. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-4266(92)90011-N 
Choe, H., & Shin, H. (1993). An Analysis of Interday and Intraday Return Volatility-Evidence from the Korea Stock 
Exchange. Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 1, 175-188. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0927-538X(93)90007-5 
Chung, D.Y. (2002). The impact of informed tr ading on corporate Liquidity Paul Brockman. Journal of 
Multinational Financial Management, 12, 239-259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1042-444X(01)00053-6 
Chung, K. H., & Van Ness, R. A. (2001). Order handling rules, tick size, and the intraday pattern of bid-ask spreads 
for Nasdaq stocks. Journal of Financial Markets, 4, 143−161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(00)00021-5 
Clark, P. K. (1973). A subordinated stochastic pro cess model with finite variance for speculative prices.

Journal of Financial Markets, 4, 143−161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(00)00021-5 
Clark, P. K. (1973). A subordinated stochastic pro cess model with finite variance for speculative prices. 
Econometrica, 41, 135-156. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1913889 
Comerton-Forde C., Lau, S. T., & McInish, T. (2007). Opening and closing behavior following the introduction of 
call auctions in Singapore. Pacific Basin Finance Journal 15(1), 18-35. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pacfin.2006.04.002 
Copeland, L., & Jones, S.A. (2002). Intradaily Patterns in the Korean Index Futures Market. Asian Economic 
Journal,16,153-74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-8381.00146 
Degennaro, R., & Shrieves, R. (1997). Public information releases, private information arrival and volatility in the 
foreign exchange market. Journal of Empirical Finance , 4, 295–315. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0927-5398(97)00012-1 
Easley, D., & O'Hara, M. (1992). Time and the process of security price adjustment. Journal of Finance , 47, 
577−605. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329116 
Edmonds, R.J., & Kutan, A.M. (2002). Is public information really irrelevant in explaining asset returns? Economics 
Letters, 76, 223-229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1765(02)00050-2 
Foster, F.D., & Viswanathan, S. (1990). A theory of interday variations in volumes, variances, and trading costs in 
stock markets. Review of Financial Studies, 3, 593-624. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/3.4.593 
Foster, F.D., & Viswanathan, S. (1993).

interday variations in volumes, variances, and trading costs in 
stock markets. Review of Financial Studies, 3, 593-624. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/3.4.593 
Foster, F.D., & Viswanathan, S. (1993). Variations in trading volume, return volatility, and trading costs: evidence 
on recent price formation models. Journal of Finance, 48, 187-211. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328886 
Foucault, T. (1999). Order flow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order arket. Journal of Financial 
Markets, 2, 193−226.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(98)00012-3 
French, K.R., & Roll, R. (1986). Stock return variances: The arrival of information an d the reaction of traders. 
Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 5-26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(86)90004-8 
Gerety, M.S., & Mulherin, J. H. (1994). Price Formation on Stock Exchanges: The Evolution of Trading Within the 
Day. Review of Financial Studies, 7, 609-629. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/7.3.609 
Hamao, Y., & Hasbrouck, J. (1995). Se curities trading in the absence of deal ers: Trades and quotes in the Tokyo 
Stock Exchange. Review of Financial Studies, 8(3), 849−878. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/8.3.849 
Handa, P. (1992). On the supply of liquidity at the New York and American Stock Exchanges. Working paper. New 
York University. 
Handa, P., Schwartz, R., & Tiwari, A. (1998). Determinan ts of the bid–ask spread in an order driven market. 
Working paper, University of Iowa. 
Harris, L. (1986).

rking paper. New 
York University. 
Handa, P., Schwartz, R., & Tiwari, A. (1998). Determinan ts of the bid–ask spread in an order driven market. 
Working paper, University of Iowa. 
Harris, L. (1986). A transaction data study of we ekly and intradaily patterns in stock returns. Journal of Financial 
Economics, 16, 99-117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(86)90044-9 
Hasbrouck, J. (1991a). The summary informativen ess of stock trades: an econometric analysis. Review of Financial 
Studies, 4, 571-595. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/4.3.571 
Hasbrouck, J. (1991b). Measuring the information content of stock trades. Journal of Finance, 46 , 179-207. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328693

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 170
Ho, Y.K., & Cheung, Y.L. (1991). Behavior of Intra-daily Stock Return on an Asian Emerging Market±Hong 
Kong.Applied Economics, 23,957-966. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00036849100000044 
Ho, Y.K., Cheung, Y.L., & Cheung, D.W.W. (1993). Intraday Prices and Trading Volume Relationship in an 
Emerging Asian Market. Pacific Basin Finance Journal , 1, 203-214. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0927-538X(93)90009-7 
Jain, P., & Joh, G. (1986) . The Dependence between Hourly Prices and Triding Volume. Working Paper , The 
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. 
Jain, P., & Joh, G. (1988). The Dependence Between Hourly Prices and Trading Volume. Journal of Financial and 
Quantitative Analysis, 23, 269–284. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2331067 
Jang, H., & J. Lee. (1993) .Intraday Behavior of the Bid-Ask Spread and Related Trading Variables. Working Paper, 
University of Oklahoma. 
Kalev PS., & Pham LT (2009). Intraweek a nd intraday trade patterns and dynamics. Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 
17, 547-564. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pacfin.2009.05.002 
Kalev, P.S., Liu, W.M., Pham, P.K., & Jarnecic, E. (2004). Public information arrival and volatility of intraday stock 
returns.Journal of Banking and Finance, 28, 1441-1467. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4266(03)00126-2 
Kavajecz, K. A. (1999). A Specialist' s Quoted Depth and Limit Order Book.

ty of intraday stock 
returns.Journal of Banking and Finance, 28, 1441-1467. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4266(03)00126-2 
Kavajecz, K. A. (1999). A Specialist' s Quoted Depth and Limit Order Book. Journal of Finance , 54,747-771. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00124 
Lamoureux, C.G., & Lastrapes W. D. (1990). Heteroskedasticity in Stock Return Data Volume versus GARCH 
Effects. Journal of Finance, 45, 221-229. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328817 
Lee, C. M., Mucklow, B., & Ready, M. J. (1993). Spreads, depths and the impact of earnings information: an 
intraday analysis. Review of Financial Studies, 6(2), 345-374. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/6.2.345 
Lee, C., & Ready, M. (1991). Inferring trade direction from intraday data. Journal of Finance , 46, 733–747. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328845 
Lee, C.M.C. (1990). Information Dissemination and the Sma ll Trader: An Intraday Anal ysis of the Small Trader 
Response to Announcements of Corporate Earnings and Changes in Dividend Policy. Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell 
University. 
Lee, Y-T., Fok R.C.W., & Liu, Y-J. (2001). Explaining Intraday Pattern of Trading Volume from the Order Flow 
Data. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 28(1) and (2). 
Lehmann, B. N., & Modest, D.M. (1994).Trading and Liquidity on the Tokyo Stock Exchange:A Bird’s Rye View. 
Journal of Finance, 44, 951-984. 329212 
Lockwood, L.J., & Linn, S. C. (1990). An examination of market return volatility during overnight and intraday

n the Tokyo Stock Exchange:A Bird’s Rye View. 
Journal of Finance, 44, 951-984. 329212 
Lockwood, L.J., & Linn, S. C. (1990). An examination of market return volatility during overnight and intraday 
periods 1964-1989. Journal of Finance, 45, 591-601. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2328672 
Madhavan, A. (1992). Trading Mechanisms in Stock markets. The Journal of Finance , 47, 607-641 Published by: 
Blackwell Publishing for the American Finance Association Stable. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329117 
Madhavan, R, M., & Roomans, M. (1997). Why do Security Prices Change? A Transactions Level Analysis of 
NYSE Stocks, University of Southern California, July, unpublished. 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1985). Intraday and Overnight Returns and Day-Of-The-Week Effect. Journal of 
Financial Research, 8, 119-26. 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1989). The Dependence of Hourly Volume, Trade Size and Number of Trades on 
Returns. Working Paper. University of Texas. 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1990a). A Transaction Data Analysis of the Variability of Common Stock Returns 
During 1980-1984. Journal of Banking and Finance, 14, 113-129. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-4266(90)90038-4 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1990b). An analysis of transactions data for the Toronto Stock Exchange. Journal of 
Banking and Finance, 14, 458-491. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-4266(90)90058-A 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1992). An analysis of intraday patterns in bid/ask spreads for NYSE stocks. Journal

of 
Banking and Finance, 14, 458-491. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-4266(90)90058-A 
McInish, T.H., & Wood, R.A. (1992). An analysis of intraday patterns in bid/ask spreads for NYSE stocks. Journal 
of Finance, 47, 753−764. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2329122 
Naes, R., & Skjeltorp, J.A. (2006). Order book characteristics and the volume–volatility relation: Empirical 
evidence from a limit order market. Journal of Financial Markets , 9, 408-432. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2006.04.001

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 171
Randi, N., & Johannes A.S. (2006). Order book charact eristics and the volume–vola tility relation: Empirical 
evidence from a limit order market. Journal of Financial Markets, 9, 408–432 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2006.04.001 
Stoll, H., & Whaley, R.E. (1990). Stock Market Structure and Volatility. Review of Financial Studies , 3, 37-71. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/3.1.37 
Tauchen, G., & Pitts, M. (1983) .The price vari ability-volume relationship on Speculative markets. Econometrica, 
51,485-505. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1912002 
Vo, M.T. (2007). Limit orders and the intraday behaviour of market liquidity: Evidence from the Toronto stock 
exchange. Gobal Finance Journal, 17, 379-396. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gfj.2006.06.012 
Wood, R.A., McInish, T.H., & Ord, J.K. (1985). An Investigation of Transaction Data for NYSE Stocks. Journal of 
Finance, 40, 723-739. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2327796 
Ye, J. (1995). Bid-Ask prices and sizes: The specialist's optimal quotation strategy. Working Paper. University of 
Southern California.

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 172
Table 1. The list of shares listed continuously on the Tunisian stock market during the period October 2008 - June 
2009 
Code Stock INDUSTRY 
725001 ADWYA Health 
340005 AMEN BANK Financials 
730001 ARTES Consumer services 
714001 ASSAD Consumer goods 
360035 ATB Financials 
470010 ATL Financials 
160015 ATTIJARI BANK Financials 
190060 BH Financials 
180045 BIAT Financials 
310060 BNA Financials 
220005 BT Financials 
130055 BTE-ADP Financials 
420085 CIL Financials 
720001 EL WIFACK LEASING Financials 
665001 ELECTROSTAR Consumer goods 
721001 ESSOUKNA Industrials 
713001 GIF Consumer goods 
644001 MAGASIN GENERAL Consumer services 
100010 MONOPRIX Consumer services 
570001 POULINAGROUP HLD Financials 
110025 SFBT Consumer goods 
659001 SIAME Industrials 
400005 SIMPAR Industrials 
667001 SIPHAT Health 
718001 SITS Industrials 
678001 SOMOCER Industrials 
653001 SOTETEL Telecommunication 
666001 SOTRAPIL Oil and Gas 
658001 SOTUMAG Consumer services 
656001 SOTUVER Industrials 
140070 SPDIT-SICAF Financials 
606001 STAR Financials 
260095 STB Financials 
727001 TPR Basic Material 
410020 TUNINVEST-SICAR Financials 
120040 TUNISAIR Consumer services 
210090 TUNISIE LEASING Financials 
390010 UIB Financials

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 173
Table 2. Descriptive statistics over the period October 2008 - June 2009 
Variables Value 
Number of companies 38 
Trading days 184 
Number of transactions 240564 
Quantities of transactions 121399567 
Daily Average of the number of transactions by stock 34 
Total maximum quantity traded for Attijari Bank 20163175 
T o t a l m i n i m u m q u a n t i t y t r a d e d f o r B T E - A D P 1 1 9 4 0 9 
Average daily of trading volume by the action 17506 
Number of purchase orders submitted 170413 
Quantities of stocks submitted by purchase orders 130262717 
Number of sale orders submitted 158099 
Quantities of stocks submitted by sale orders 130616034 
 
Table 3. The standardized average of return, trading volume, return volatility, spread and depth of 38 shares quoted 
in the Tunisian stock market during the period of October 2008-June 2009. 
Time Interval Stand return Stand trading volume Stand return volatility Stand quoted spread Stand depth 
10:00:00-10:10:00 0.8994 3.8556 6.5690 -0.2669 3.2521 
10:10:00-10:20:00 -0.3397 0.1709 2.1558 -1.0366 3.0942 
10:20:00-10:30:00 -0.2573 0.2864 0.7928 -1.9360 2.5917 
10:30:00-10:40:00 -0.4611 0.2675 -0.1478 -1.5782 2.1298 
10:40:00-10:50:00 -0.4635 0.5032 0.2974 -1.3097 1.9516 
10:50:00-11:00:00 -0.5281 0.6226 0.2563 -1.2487 1.5843

0.2864 0.7928 -1.9360 2.5917 
10:30:00-10:40:00 -0.4611 0.2675 -0.1478 -1.5782 2.1298 
10:40:00-10:50:00 -0.4635 0.5032 0.2974 -1.3097 1.9516 
10:50:00-11:00:00 -0.5281 0.6226 0.2563 -1.2487 1.5843 
11:00:00-11:10:00 -0.2454 0.4679 -0.1482 -0.7586 1.1715 
11:10:00-11:20:00 -0.4800 0.6026 0.0554 -0.8748 1.0153 
11:20:00-11:30:00 -0.2340 0.8543 -0.1303 -0.5915 0.8403 
11:30:00-11:40:00 -0.2640 0.3362 -0.4138 -0.5413 0.1713 
11:40:00-11:50:00 -0.2174 0.5057 -0.3939 -0.3601 0.2582 
11:50:00-12:00:00 -0.1775 0.1502 -0.6186 -0.1237 -0.0843 
12:00:00-12:10:00 -0.2285 -0.1036 -0.7242 0.0330 -0.2031 
12:10:00-12:20:00 0.1890 -0.8539 -0.9079 -0.0724 -0.9182 
12:20:00-12:30:00 -0.1872 -1.0989 -1.1878 -0.2090 -0.9698 
12:30:00-12:40:00 0.0289 -0.9780 -0.7344 0.4608 -1.4721 
12:40:00-12:50:00 -0.0009 -1.5465 -1.0798 0.6596 -1.4800 
12:50:00-13:00:00 0.0824 -1.5922 -0.6250 0.6435 -1.7698 
13:00:00-13:10:00 0.0269 -1.4585 -0.9340 0.5848 -2.0680 
13:10:00-13:20:00 -0.2196 -1.4928 -0.8808 0.7660 -2.2019 
13:20:00-13:30:00 0.4064 -1.5666 -0.8513 1.3140 -2.4283 
13:30:00-13:40:00 0.1778 -1.1224 -0.8307 1.5469 -2.1907 
13:40:00-13:50:00 0.5659 0.3719 -0.3692 1.8643 -1.5452 
13:50:00-14:00:00 1.9276 2.8180 0.8515 3.0349 -0.7290

www.ccsenet.org/ijef International Journal of Economics and Finance V ol. 4, No. 5; May 2012 
 ISSN 1916-971X E-ISSN 1916-9728 174
Table 4. Estimation of different models of the intraday liquidity, volatility of return and trading activity for the 38 
stocks quoted in the Tunisian stock market during the period of October 2008-June 2009. 
 Stand return Stand trading volume Stand retu rn volatility Stand quoted spread Stand depth 
α଴ Coefficient -0,1086 -0,0295 -0,3392 -0,0671 -0,1215 
 t-statistic -2,1150** -0,6476 -7,4333* -1,6051 -3,7709* 
αଵ Coefficient 1,0080 2,0049 3,7102 -0,0698 1,7903 
 t-statistic 8,7793* 19,6436* 36,3517* -0,7468 24,842* 
αଶ Coefficient -0,2311 0,1554 1,4455 -0,4648 1,7093 
 t-statistic -2,0128*** 1,5230 14,1635* -4,9693* 23,7180* 
αଷ Coefficient -0,1487 0,2134 0,7461 -0,9263 1,4515 
 t-statistic -1,2950 2,0913** 7,3105* -9,9031* 20,1404* 
αସ Coefficient -0,3525 0,1725 0,2634 -0,7427 1,2144 
 t-statistic -3,0702* 1,6904** 2,5810** -7,9403* 16,8511* 
αହ Coefficient -0,3549 0,2772 0,4919 -0,6049 1,1230 
 t-statistic -3,0909* 2,7162* 4,8199* -6,4675* 15,5829* 
α଺ Coefficient -0,4195 0,3980 0,4708 -0,5736 0,9345 
 t-statistic -3,6540* 3,8995* 4,6130* -6,1328* 12,9673* 
α଻ Coefficient -0,1368 0,2561 0,2632 -0,3221 0,7227 
 t-statistic -1,1916 2,5096** 2,5788** -3,4439* 10,0284* 
α଼ Coefficient -0,3714 0,3108 0,3677 -0,3817 0,6425 
 t-statistic -3,2347* 3,0454* 3,6030* -4,0814* 8,9162* 
αଽ Coefficient -0,1254 0,4510 0,2724 -0,2363 0,5527

2,5096** 2,5788** -3,4439* 10,0284* 
α଼ Coefficient -0,3714 0,3108 0,3677 -0,3817 0,6425 
 t-statistic -3,2347* 3,0454* 3,6030* -4,0814* 8,9162* 
αଽ Coefficient -0,1254 0,4510 0,2724 -0,2363 0,5527 
 t-statistic -1,0924 4,4193* 2,6689** -2,5271* 7,6702* 
αଵ଴ Coefficient -0,1554 0,1710 0,1269 -0,2106 0,2094 
 t-statistic -1,3539 1,6761 1,2435 -2,2517** 2,9066* 
αଵହ Coefficient -0,0786 -0,4973 -0,2702 -0,0401 -0,3761 
 t-statistic -0,6847 -4,8730* -2,6480** -0,4289 -5,2195* 
αଵ଺ Coefficient 0,1375 -0,4699 -0,0375 0,3036 -0,6339 
 t-statistic 1,1980 -4,6047* -0,3682 3,2460* -8,7958* 
αଵ଻ Coefficient 0,1076 -0,7898 -0,2148 0,4056 -0,6379 
 t-statistic 0,9378 -7,7384* -2,1048 4,3365* -8,8519* 
αଵ଼ Coefficient 0,1911 -0,8213 0,0185 0,3974 -0,7866 
 t-statistic 1,6644 -8,0471* 0,1816 4,2485* -10,915* 
αଵଽ Coefficient 0,1355 -0,7325 -0,1400 0,3672 -0,9396 
 t-statistic 1,1805 -7,1770* -1,3719 3,9265* -13,038* 
αଶ଴ Coefficient -0,1110 -0,7356 -0,1127 0,4602 -1,0084 
 t-statistic -0,9673 -7,2073* -1,1042 4,9205* -13,992* 
αଶଵ Coefficient 0,5150 -0,7997 -0,0975 0,7414 -1,1245 
 t-statistic 4,4860* -7,8358* -0,9559 7,9265* -15,604* 
αଶଶ Coefficient 0,2864 -0,5607 -0,0870 0,8609 -1,0026 
 t-statistic 2,4945* -5,4945* -0,8525 9,2041* -13,911* 
αଶଷ Coefficient 0,6745 0,2119 0,1497 1,0238 -0,6714 
 t-statistic 5,8746* 2,0762** 1,4675 10,9456* -9,3160* 
αଶସ Coefficient 2,0362 1,4940 0,7762 1,6245 -0,2526 
 t-statistic 17,733* 14,6381* 7,6056* 17,3673* -3,5049*

745 0,2119 0,1497 1,0238 -0,6714 
 t-statistic 5,8746* 2,0762** 1,4675 10,9456* -9,3160* 
αଶସ Coefficient 2,0362 1,4940 0,7762 1,6245 -0,2526 
 t-statistic 17,733* 14,6381* 7,6056* 17,3673* -3,5049* 
Notes: *** 10% significance level, ** 5% significance level, * 1% significance level

www.ccsen
Published b
Table 5. M
 
All intervals 
The first three
intervals 
The eighteen 
intervals with
trading day 
The last three
intervals 
 
 
 
Figure 
Figure 
 
net.org/ijef 
by Canadian Cen
Matrix of uncon
V
Stand re
Stand tra
Stand re
Stand qu
Stand de
e 
Stand re
Stand tra
Stand re
Stand qu
Stand de
in the 
Stand re
Stand tra
Stand re
Stand qu
Stand de
e 
Stand re
Stand tra
Stand re
Stand qu
Stand de
1. Evolution o
3. Evolution o
 I n t
nter of Science a
nditional corre
ariables 
turn 
ading volume 
turn volatility 
uoted spread 
epth 
turn 
ading volume 
turn volatility 
uoted spread 
epth 
turn 
ading volume 
turn volatility 
uoted spread 
epth 
turn 
ading volume 
turn volatility 
uoted spread 
epth 
of intraday stan
 
of intraday stan
volatility 
ternational Journ
and Education
elation between
Stand 
return 
Stan
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
ndardized retu
ndardized retu
nal of Economic
n all variables
nd trading volume
0.4129 
1.0000 
 
 
 
0.9994 
1.0000 
 
 
 
-0.7616 
1.0000 
 
 
 
0.9851 
1.0000 
 
 
 
urn Fig
urn Fi
cs and Finance 
Stand retur
volatility
0.3247
0.7821
1.0000
 
 
0.9590
0.9675
1.0000
 
 
-0.7346
0.8342
1.0000
 
 
0.9984
0.9932
1.0000
 
 
gure 2. Evoluti
igure 4. Evolut
 
rn Stan d
spr
0.7
-0.
-0.
1.
0
0.8
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.8
-0.
-0.
1.
0
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.0
ion of intraday
 
tion of intraday
V ol. 4, No. 5; M
d quoted 
read 
Stan
7775 - 0
1145 0
1937 0
0000 - 0
 1
8092 0
8275 0
9425 0
0000 0
 1
8534 - 0
8609 0

.8
0.9
1.0
0.8
-0.
-0.
1.
0
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.0
ion of intraday
 
tion of intraday
V ol. 4, No. 5; M
d quoted 
read 
Stan
7775 - 0
1145 0
1937 0
0000 - 0
 1
8092 0
8275 0
9425 0
0000 0
 1
8534 - 0
8609 0
8088 0
0000 - 0
 1
9999 0
9836 0
9979 0
0000 0
 1
y standardized 
y standardized
May 2012 
175
nd depth
0.2703 
.6688 
.6760 
0.7604 
.0000 
.6404 
.6646 
.8317 
.9694 
.0000 
0.8314 
.9166 
.8685 
0.9716 
.0000 
.9704 
.9974 
.9824 
.9683 
.0000 
trading volum
d quoted spread
me 
d

Fugu
Fi
F
www.ccsenet.or
176
ure 5. Evolution
igure 7. The tr
Figure 9. The q
 
 
 
rg/i j e f 
 
n of intraday s
rading volume 
 
quoted spread 
 
 I n t e r n a
 
standardized de
spectrum obta
spectrum obta
 
ational Journal o
 
epth at best lim
ained by FFT
ined by FFT
of Economics an
 
mit
F
Figur
 
F
nd Finance 
 
Figure 6. The r
re 8. The return
Figure 10. The 
 V o l
 ISSN 1916-971X
return spectrum
n volatility spe
 
depth spectru
 
l. 4, No. 5; May 
X E-ISSN 191 6
m obtained by 
ectrum obtaine
um obtained by
2012 
6-9728 
 
FFT 
 
ed by FFT 
 
y FFT
