arXiv:1005.3535v1  [q-fin.TR]  19 May 2010
Intraday Patterns in the Cross-section of Stock Returns
STEVEN L. HESTON, ROBERT A. KORAJCZYK, and RONNIE SADKA ∗
May 3, 2010
Abstract
Motivated by the literature on investment ﬂows and optimal trading , we examine intraday pre-
dictability in the cross-section of stock returns. We ﬁnd a striking p attern of return continuation
at half-hour intervals that are exact multiples of a trading day, and this eﬀect lasts for at least 40
trading days. Volume, order imbalance, volatility, and bid-ask sprea ds exhibit similar patterns,
but do not explain the return patterns. We also show that short-t erm return reversal is driven
by temporary liquidity imbalances lasting less than an hour and bid-ask bounce. Timing trades
can reduce execution costs by the equivalent of the eﬀective spre ad.
∗ Heston is with the University of Maryland, Korajczyk is with Northwestern University, and Sadka is with Boston
College. We thank Joseph Cerniglia, Ian Domowitz, Lisa Gold berg, Campbell Harvey (the editor), Ravi Jagannathan,
Bruce Lehmann, Maureen O’Hara, Michael Pagano, Mark Seasho les, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Dimitri Vayanos,
Julie Wu, the anonymous referees and associate editor, and s eminar participants at the NBER Microstructure Meeting;
Center for Research in Econometric Analysis of Time Series, Aarhus Universitet; Boston College; Brandeis University;
Cornell University; CREST-INSEE, Paris; HEC Montr´ eal; Mc Gill University; Northwestern University; University
College Dublin; University of Southern California; the Cit igroup Quant Conference; Goldman Sachs; and PanAgora
Asset Management for comments. We thank Lew Thorson for comp utational assistance. We acknowledge ﬁnancial
support from PanAgora Asset Management and Korajczyk ackno wledges the ﬁnancial support of the Zell Center for
Risk Research and the Jerome Kenney Fund. Forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.
We postulate that systematic trading and institutional fun d ﬂows lead to predictable patterns in
trading volume and order imbalances among common stocks. If these patterns are fully anticipated,
then they should not cause predictability in stock returns. Yet, we ﬁnd periodicity in the cross-
section of stock returns. To study the nature of intraday per iodicity we divide the trading day
into 13 half-hour trading intervals. A stock’s return over a given trading interval is negatively
related to its returns over recent intervals, consistent wi th the negative autocorrelation induced
by bid-ask bounce and lack of resiliency in markets. However , there is a statistically signiﬁcant
positive relation between a stock’s return over a given inte rval and its subsequent returns at daily
frequencies (i.e., lags of 13, 26, 39, ... periods). That is, knowing that the equity return of XYZ,
Inc. is high between 1:30 PM and 2:00 PM today has explanatory power for the return on XYZ, Inc.
equity at the same time tomorrow and on subsequent days. This eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant
for at least 40 trading days.
Two disparate strands of the literature, when taken togethe r, suggest the presence of intraday
periodicity in trading volume and order imbalances. First, there is substantial evidence that fund
ﬂows to certain types of institutional investors exhibit au tocorrelation. Del Guercio and Tkac (2002,
Table 5) ﬁnd that ﬂows to mutual funds exhibit signiﬁcant aut ocorrelation while ﬂows to pension
fund managers show much weaker autocorrelation. Frazzini a nd Lamont (2008, Figure 1) show
that fund ﬂows into mutual funds in the current quarter are re lated to fund ﬂows in many future
quarters (up to 18 quarters). Lou (2008) also ﬁnds evidence o f persistent fund ﬂows into and out of
mutual funds. Blackburn, Goetzmann, and Ukhov (2007) ﬁnd th at the autocorrelation in mutual
fund ﬂows varies by category, with value funds exhibiting gr eater autocorrelation in ﬂows than
growth funds. Even without explicit autocorrelation in fun d ﬂows, there may be autocorrelation
in trading by a given institutional manager. For example, so me managers rebalance individual
customers’ separate accounts on successive days. Campbell , Ramadorai, and Schwartz (2009) use
quarterly 13-F ﬁlings and intraday trading data from the New York Stock Exchange’s Trade and
Quotation (TAQ) database to estimate the aggregate trading behavior of institutional investors at
a daily frequency. Their evidence indicates that instituti onal trading is highly persistent. That is,
institutional investment managers tend to buy or sell the sa me stocks on successive days.
Second, there is a growing literature on trading algorithms that are designed to minimize trading
costs or optimize the trade-oﬀ between trading costs and the uncertainty associated with the prices
obtained over the trading program. For example, Bertsimas a nd Lo (1998) study the problem of
minimizing the expected cost of executing an exogenously sp eciﬁed trade size over an exogenously
given horizon. In the simplest version of their model the pri ce impact of trade is permanent and
proportional to the number of shares traded while non-trade public information causes mean zero
asset price changes. The lowest expected impact strategy is to trade an equal number of shares at
every point in time. If conditional mean price changes are no nzero, then it would be optimal to
either speed up or slow down trading relative to this base cas e (depending on the expected direction
of price movements and the direction of trade).
A number of papers extend the above results to incorporate th e risk of the trading program,
in addition to the expected trading cost, for risk averse tra ders (e.g., Almgren and Chriss (2000),
Grinold and Kahn (2000), Vayanos (2001), Huberman and Stanz l (2005), and Engle and Ferstenberg
(2007)). Under price dynamics similar to Bertsimas and Lo (1 998) and a price impact function with
permanent and transitory components, Almgren and Chriss (2 000) derive an eﬃcient frontier of
optimal trading strategies that explicitly trade oﬀ execut ion costs with the risk of adverse price
movements when traders have mean-variance utility. Linear price impact functions allow for closed-
form solutions. The expected cost-minimizing strategy of B ertsimas and Lo (1998) is optimal for
risk-neutral agents. Risk averse agents will generally liq uidate the portfolio more rapidly in order
to reduce the variance of the execution cost. Thus, these pap ers imply a trading trajectory that
executes quickly at the beginning of the trading horizon and slows down as time passes. Hora
(2006) uses a diﬀerent preference speciﬁcation that leads to an optimal trading strategy that trades
rapidly at the beginning and end of the trading horizon and mo re slowly in the middle of the
period. The horizon over which trading takes place is genera lly unspeciﬁed in the models and could
be a day, month, year, or some other interval. Almgren and Lor enz (2006) argue that a trading
horizon of one day is consistent with the manner in which many institutions trade. In line with
this view, Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk (2002) ﬁnd that 92. 5% of a sample of institutional orders
are completed the same day that trading is initiated. The use of algorithmic trading has grown
considerably and, as of 2007, was estimated to account for on e-third of equity trading volume in
the United States (Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2009) ).
The autocorrelation of fund ﬂows and the use of trading algor ithms discussed above imply the
existence of daily patterns in volume and order imbalances i n individual stocks. If Fund A receives
fund ﬂows today and buys stock XYZ using the Almgren and Chris s (2000) algorithm, then A will
trade XYZ more aggressively in the morning and less aggressi vely as the day progresses. Since fund
ﬂows are autocorrelated, Fund A is likely to receive fund ﬂow s tomorrow. Further, because Fund
A is likely to buy XYZ tomorrow using the same trading algorit hm, volume and order imbalances
2
in XYZ are likely to arise tomorrow at the same time as today. A necdotal evidence indicates
that this periodicity may be likely to happen even without ex plicitly invoking trading algorithms.
Large equity managers have demanding schedules that involv e client meetings, staﬀ meetings,
compliance, and reporting. The decision to buy or sell stock may require research analysis or
portfolio optimization. The manager must then decide wheth er to use brokers or whether to
relay the transactions through a crossing network such as Po sit, Island, or Archipelago. These
networks cross at certain times of the day, leaving unﬁlled o rders at the end of the crossing. A
busy manager may therefore ﬁnd it cheap and expedient to exec ute these orders at speciﬁc times
of the day, leaving the remaining time available for other tr ading, research, and risk management
activity. The use of a trading algorithm that speciﬁes a part icular pattern of trades would only
strengthen this periodicity. Additionally, some types of i nstitutional traders may have other reasons
for demonstrating periodicity in trading. Index funds, for example, tend to trade at the close to
reduce tracking error.
The above conjectures about trading behavior imply periodi city in volume and order imbal-
ance. Indeed, there is extensive evidence of intraday patte rns in volume and volatility (e.g., Wood,
McInish, and Ord (1985), Harris (1986), Jain and Joh (1988), and Pagano, Peng, and Schwartz
(2008)). However, while intraday patterns of volume and vol atility can be justiﬁed with models of
discretionary liquidity trading (e.g., Admati and Pﬂeider er (1988) and Hora (2006)), predictable
patterns in returns are harder to explain. We consider sever al possibilities, none of which fully
explain the periodicity. For instance, a long-standing lit erature on intraday return patterns (e.g.,
Wood, McInish, and Ord (1985), Harris (1986), and Jain and Jo h (1988)) shows that average re-
turns tend to be higher at the beginning and end of the trading day. Our observed patterns are not
consistent with a simple mean shift at the beginning and end o f the day. Additionally, the litera-
ture documents a number of seasonal return patterns, say at t he monthly or quarterly frequency,
in stock returns. Some of this periodicity is consistent wit h predictable patterns of trading by
investors. For example, Keim (1989) ﬁnds that turn-of-the- year trading patterns induce patterns
in the probability that trades occur at the ask price versus t he bid price. He ﬁnds that this trading
pattern explains the size-related turn-of-the-year eﬀect i n stock prices. However, we ﬁnd that the
return continuation at daily intervals is not due to the eﬀect found in Keim (1989), that is, to
changes in the frequency of trades occurring at either the bi d or ask prices. Our intraday return
pattern is stronger over the ﬁrst and last half-hours of the t rading day, as one might expect given
the patterns in volume and volatility, but remains statisti cally signiﬁcant over the other periods
3
of the day. Thus, the intraday return pattern is not due simpl y to uniformly high returns at the
beginning and end of the trading day.
Markets may also respond to news that arrives on a daily sched ule. Newscasts and conference
calls occur at regular times of the day, and behavioral biase s may cause traders to overreact or
underreact to salient news (Tversky and Kahneman (1974)), l eading in turn to return periodicity.
Our observed return periodicity is consistent with the info rmation acquisition model of Holden
and Subrahmanyam (2002) if agents tend to become informed at intervals that correspond to our
observed periodicity.
Further, if there are regular news cycles, then traders may b e reluctant to hold stocks during
risky times. For example, if market-wide information is rel eased at 3:30 PM, then high beta stocks
may have a higher return premium at those times. This suggest s that daily phenomena will be
more pronounced among risky stocks than safe stocks. We do no t ﬁnd support for this hypothesis.
We also study whether the return periodicity is driven by sim ilar patterns in order ﬂow and
liquidity. We show that trading volume has similar patterns to returns, that is, ﬁrms that experi-
ence a relatively high change in their trading volume over a p articular half-hour interval typically
experience a high change in their volume during the same half -hour interval during each of the
next few days. Although related, the periodicity in trading volume does not completely explain
the periodicity of returns. When we split volume into that du e to large versus small trade size,
both measures of volume show daily periodicity, but neither explains the daily return periodicity.
Oddly, the level of order imbalance (OI) does not exhibit obv ious periodicity, even when parti-
tioned into small versus large trades. However, changes in o rder imbalance exhibit periodicity
similar to returns, but the pattern in order imbalances does not explain the pattern in returns.
Bid-ask spreads exhibit similar intraday periodicity as th at of returns, but spreads do not explain
the return patterns.
Several other tests suggest that the intraday periodicity a t the daily frequency is not simply an
artifact of previously shown patterns. For example, it is no t concentrated in any particular weekday,
and therefore is not a manifestation of the day-of-the-week eﬀect (see French (1980)), and it is not
concentrated in any particular month (see Heston and Sadka ( 2008a, 2008b)). The eﬀect is also not
particularly related to the turn-of-the-month eﬀect (Ariel (1987)) or the turn-of-the-quarter eﬀect
(Carhart et al. (2002)). The pattern of intraday returns is h ighly persistent, lasting for two months
(40 trading days). It is not due to a particular market capita lization group, inclusion in the S&P
500 index, nor is it a manifestation of intraday movements in systematic risk. There is substantial
4
evidence of intraday periodicity of return volatility (And ersen and Bollerslev (1997)), which we also
ﬁnd in our sample. However, patterns in volatility do not exp lain our return periodicity.
Finally, we compare the results for the post-decimalizatio n period to prior periods, which include
1993 to 1997, for which the minimum price increment was one-e ighth of a dollar, and 1997 to 2000,
for which the minimum price increment was one-sixteenth of a dollar. We ﬁnd that the statistical
signiﬁcance of the intraday periodicity is greatest in the p ost-decimalization period.
In Section I we present our main ﬁndings regarding return con tinuation at daily frequencies
and short-term return reversals. In Section II we study poss ible cross-sectional explanations for the
ﬁndings. In Section III we study the properties of volume, or der imbalance, volatility, and liquidity
while we provide additional diagnostics in Section IV. Our c onclusions are presented in Section V.
I. Patterns of Resilience in Intraday Stock Returns
We begin this study by measuring intraday persistence in the cross-section of stock returns. It is
well known that short-term stock returns are negatively aut ocorrelated (e.g., Lehmann (1990) and
Lo and MacKinlay (1990)). While this phenomenon does not occ ur in the model of Glosten and Mil-
grom (1985), in which the spreads are due solely to adverse se lection caused by informed traders, it
appears in other models with bid-ask spreads (Roll (1984) an d Glosten and Harris (1988)), specialist
inventory eﬀects (Stoll (1978)), or other non-adverse selec tion costs associated with market-making.
Here we study the resilience of stock prices based on the patt ern of autocorrelation over various
horizons.
A. Methodology and Main Results
Our sample of ﬁrms consists of all New York Stock Exchange (NY SE) listed ﬁrms from January
2001 through December 2005 that we are able to match with the N YSE Trade and Quotation
(TAQ) database. We retain only assets whose CRSP share codes are 10 or 11, that is, we discard
certiﬁcates, ADRs, shares of beneﬁcial interest, units, co mpanies incorporated outside the U.S.,
Americus Trust components, closed-end funds, preferred st ocks, and REITs. The matching yielded
data for 1,715 ﬁrms. The period of study is chosen to substant ially overlap the period of deci-
malization, the transition to which occurred between Augus t 2000 and January 2001. We use the
TAQ database to calculate intraday stock returns. For each s tock we calculate returns over half-
hour intervals. This gives 13 intraday intervals per tradin g day from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. This
excludes after-hours trading and overnight open-close pri ce movements. Note that settlement on
stock transactions occurs after the end of the trading day. T his means that trades at diﬀerent times
5
do not need to earn the risk-free rate intraday. In other word s, intraday stock returns compensate
for liquidity and risk, not for the time value of money. In add ition to returns, we also measure
changes in volume deﬁned as the change in the logarithm of the number of shares traded over a
half-hour interval. The return and volume data provide meas ures of price and quantity movements
of individual stocks throughout the day.
We analyze intraday stock returns using the cross-sectiona l regression methodology of Jegadeesh
(1990). For each lag, k, we run cross-sectional regressions of half-hour stock retu rns on returns
lagged by k half-hour periods,
ri,t = α k,t + γk,tri,t−k + ui,t, (1)
where ri,t is the return on stock i in the half-hour interval t. The slope coeﬃcients γk,t represent the
response of returns at half-hour t to returns over a previous interval lagged by k half-hour periods,
the “return responses.” 1 In addition to the simple regression (1), we also use a multip le regression
to estimate all return responses up to ﬁve trading days joint ly
ri,t = α t + γ1,tri,t−1 + γ2,tri,t−2 + ... + γ65,tri,t−65 + ui,t. (2)
Both the simple regression and the multiple regression use a ll ﬁrms with returns available in intervals
t and t− k. Initially we present unconditional return responses, ave raging over diﬀerent times of the
day t for each lag k. Later we examine conditional averages, including time-of -day variation in the
magnitude of these eﬀects. We calculate the pattern of return eﬀects by averaging return responses
over time for half-hour lags k. Note that using cross-sectional regression in this way is d iﬀerent
from measuring the autocorrelation of stock returns. In par ticular, the cross-sectional regression
subtracts an overall market eﬀect, which reduces variance an d focuses on returns relative to other
stocks.
Figure 1 presents the average return responses across diﬀere nt lags (Panel A) for lags up to one
week.2 The data are scaled so the units for ˆγk are basis points. With 13 half-hour intervals per
day and ﬁve trading days per week, this produces 65 lagged int ervals. Consistent with the previous
literature, the ﬁrst several return responses are negative . This means that stock returns experience
a reversal period lasting several hours. These reversals ma y be a manifestation of bid-ask bounce,
time variation in the frequency of trades occurring at bid ve rsus ask prices (as in Keim (1989)), or
temporary liquidity dislocations that take some time for li quidity providers to accommodate. We
disentangle these eﬀects.
[Figure 1 here]
6
The most striking pattern in Figure 1 is that, following the r eversal period, the return responses
are positive, peaking at horizons that are exact multiples o f 13 half-hours, or one trading day. The
ﬁgure shows clear periodicity at daily intervals. Panel B of Figure 1 plots the t-statistics of ˆγk, as
estimated in Fama and MacBeth (1973). The t-statistics show the same type of periodicity. Over
the ﬁrst week the smallest t-statistic at the daily frequency (lags 13, 26, 39, 52, and 65 ) is 9.62.
Table I shows that the simple regression return responses ar e highly statistically signiﬁcant at
almost all lags. The Internet Appendix (Table IA.I) 3 shows the results of the multiple regression
responses are similar to the simple regression in magnitude , generally with greater statistical sig-
niﬁcance. Over the period of one calendar day these results i ndicate that returns are temporarily
reversed but then rebound.
[Table I here]
Looking beyond 13 lags, the return eﬀects over half-hour inte rvals on subsequent days remain
largely negative, with statistically signiﬁcant positive eﬀects at multiples of 13 lags, that is, 26, 39,
52, and 65. It appears that temporary price pressure is rever sed at virtually all future times except
at the same time interval on subsequent days.
Since the simple regression produces results almost identi cal to the multiple regression, the
univariate speciﬁcation (1) seems adequate. By focusing on one lag at a time, we can easily
examine a number of diﬀerent lags.
The implicit portfolio weights in the portfolio returns obt ained from the estimated regression
coeﬃcients, ˆγk, could be rather extreme since, as mentioned above, ˆγk is the return on a zero-cost
portfolio whose excess return k periods ago is 100% (Lehmann and Modest (2005)). Therefore, we
also study the returns to relatively well-diversiﬁed (equa l-weighted) long-short portfolios formed
on the basis of lagged half-hour returns. Using the methodol ogy of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993),
we sort stocks into equal-weighted deciles based on their re turns over a previous half-hour interval.
Figure 2 and Table II present these results extending the lag s to roughly two trading months
(520 lags). We form portfolios of ”losers” and ”winners” and calculate equal-weighted returns (in
basis points) on portfolios of stocks that had the lowest and highest 10% of returns k periods ago,
respectively. The column labeled ”10-1” is the average retu rn on a portfolio that is long the winners
portfolio and short the losers portfolio. 4 This long-short average return is plotted as a function of
k in Figure 2, along with the associated t-statistics.
[Figure 2 and Table II here]
7
Based on a half-hour return on a given day, the average diﬀeren ce between the top decile of
winners and the bottom decile of losers is 3.01 basis points a t the same time on the next day. To get
a sense of the economic magnitude of this periodicity, we con sider a few comparisons. Being able to
capture three basis points is similar in magnitude to the dai ly equity risk premium. 5 The eﬀect may
be larger than the equity risk premium in terms of incrementa l Sharpe ratio since one needs to bear
one day of risk to earn the risk premium but only needs to shift trade a fraction of a day to take
advantage of the periodicity. Being able to capture three ba sis points is also similar in magnitude
to saving a $0.01 commission on a stock priced at $30/share (w hich is in line with institutional
commission rates on common stock). Alternatively, Gurliac ci, Jeria, and Soﬁanos (2009) ﬁnd that
the typical quoted half-spread of S&P 500 stocks in their ben chmark (”normal” volatility) period
(May 2008) is 1.7 basis points, which means that the average r eturn predictability is of the same
order of magnitude as twice the quoted half-spread (the retu rn diﬀerence requires two trades, so
the relevant comparison is twice the half spread). 6,7 Jeria and Soﬁanos (2008) evaluate institutional
order executions for two alternative algorithms and ﬁnd tha t there is a 2.3 basis point diﬀerence
between the implementation shortfall for the average order . They use this result to recommend that
traders migrate from one algorithm to the other. Thus, for hi gh-frequency institutional traders,
the eﬀect appears to be economically consequential, particu larly for high frequency traders (”Rise
of the Machines,” The Economist, July 30, 2009).
The average return diﬀerence remains positive, albeit small er, on subsequent days. The diﬀer-
ence remains positive and statistically signiﬁcant for up t o 40 days (520 half-hours). It appears
there is a persistent and predictable pattern in intraday st ock transaction prices. When a stock
goes up on one day, buyers earn a return premium by buying the s tock prior to (or delaying sales
until after) the same time interval on future days. Converse ly, sellers provide a discount by selling
at this time when they could expect a higher average price 30 m inutes later.
B. Reversals: Resiliency, Bid-Ask Bounce, and Periodicity in Order Imbalances
A market is resilient when it replenishes depth rapidly afte r having been depleted by large
transactions (see, for example, Coppejans, Domowitz, and M adhavan (2004) and Large (2007)).
We expect to see large price movements due to these types of tr ades, followed by rapid reversals as
new limit orders replenish the order book. In less resilient markets, the reversal will take longer,
leading to a longer period of return reversals. Therefore, t he observed negative values of ˆγk at low
values of k (Figure 1, Table I, and the Internet Appendix Table IA.I), an d the negative returns on
the winners minus losers portfolios (Figure 2) may be due to l iquidity shocks when the market is
8
not very resilient. While this cause may be plausible for the negative ˆγk for k between one and
eight, it is unlikely to explain the negative ˆγk for lags corresponding to two to ﬁve days ago.
An alternative explanation for the negative values of ˆγk is some combination of bid-ask bounce
and time variation in the frequency of trades occurring at bi d versus ask prices (as in Keim (1989)).
In Roll (1984) there is an equal chance that a trade occurs at t he bid price or the ask price. This
implies that order ﬂow is not autocorrelated, but that bid-a sk bounce induces negative ﬁrst-order
autocorrelation in returns. In the Roll model there is no aut ocorrelation in returns at lags greater
than k = 1. However, the empirical evidence shows that order imbala nces (signed order ﬂow) tend
to be autocorrelated (Sadka (2006)), so trades at the ask wil l tend to be followed by trades with
a higher probability of being at the ask. This type of pattern could lead to reversals that are not
immediate (that is, return autocorrelation beyond the ﬁrst lag).
Of course, both liquidity imbalances and bid-ask bounce are likely to be present in the data. To
distinguish between lack of resiliency and bid-ask bounce, we reestimate ˆγk using returns calculated
from only bid prices (deﬁned as the current bid quote for the t ransactions), from only ask prices,
and from only midpoint prices, instead of from transaction p rices. If the observed return reversal
pattern is due to lack of resiliency, we should see return rev ersals using the bid-to-bid, ask-to-ask,
and midpoint-to-midpoint returns. Conversely, if the reve rsals are merely due to bid-ask bounce,
then there should be no return reversals using bid-to-bid or ask-to-ask returns.
In Figure 3 we plot the estimates, ˆγ k, and their t-statistics using bid-to-bid, ask-to-ask, and
midpoint-to-midpoint returns. The only reversal that is st atistically signiﬁcant is that for k = 1.
This is consistent with the market taking longer than 30 minu tes, but less that 60 minutes, to
restore shocks to liquidity, consistent with the evidence i n Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam
(2005). Thus, there is evidence of a resiliency eﬀect at lag k = 1 only, and all of the reversals
evident using transaction returns beyond lag k = 1 disappear using bid-to-bid and ask-to-ask
returns. Our inference is that the negative values of ˆγk beyond lag 1 shown in Figures 1 and 2 are
due to bid-ask bounce. Once that eﬀect is removed, there seems to be some evidence of momentum
(positive values of ˆγk) in returns using bid-to-bid and ask-to-ask prices.
[Figure 3 here]
While the short-term reversals evident in Figures 1 and 2 are consistent with microstructure
theory and give us a coherent picture of resiliency and bid-a sk bounce, the positive return responses
at daily frequencies are much more diﬃcult to explain. We now turn to the nature of these return
9
continuations and their relation to other periodicity anom alies. We ﬁrst study patterns across
past-return deciles and across diﬀerent times of the day.
C. Patterns Across Past-Return Deciles
We develop and compare strategies that hold stocks over a sin gle half hour interval to focus on
the periodic return pattern based on past returns at diﬀerent lags. Table III shows the performance
of stock deciles ranked on their performance in previous hal f-hour intervals. The strategies labeled
”daily” sort stocks based on one half-hour interval at the sa me time on a previous day ( k =
13, 26, 39, 52, or 65). The top row lists the decile number, with decile j at time t being made up
of those stocks whose returns are in the jth decile (from lowest to highest) in period t − k for
k = 13, 26, 39, 52, or 65.
[Table III here]
The nondaily strategies rank assets into deciles based on av erage returns over a previous 24-
hour period except the daily lags. For example, the Day 1-Non daily strategy forms portfolios on
the basis of their average returns over lags 1 through 12, the Day 2-Nondaily strategy uses average
returns over lags 14 through 25, etc. By studying the returns on these decile portfolios we can
observe any nonlinearity in the relation between average re turns across deciles, such as whether the
daily pattern is concentrated in the upper or lower performi ng deciles.
The table shows most of the statistical and economic signiﬁc ance comes from the extreme
deciles. For example, the worst nondaily losers over the pre vious day earn an average of 3.16 basis
points, while the best nondaily winners lose 1.51 basis poin ts per half-hour holding period. The
average returns are nearly monotonic across intermediate d eciles. The signs are reversed for the
daily decile strategies. For example, the worst decile of lo sers over the same interval of the previous
day continue to lose an average of 1.35 basis points, while th e best decile of daily winners earn
1.66 basis points per half-hour interval. The intermediate decile average returns are monotonic,
but most of the signiﬁcance comes from the lowest and highest deciles.
The magnitude of the daily response is most substantial on th e ﬁrst day, however there is a
smaller persistent eﬀect. For lags beyond one day, the averag e daily winners minus losers decile
spreads remain above one basis point per half-hour for lags o f up to ﬁve days (with t-statistics above
8.7). By contrast, the magnitude of the negative nondaily wi nners minus losers decile spreads is
less than one basis point. Average decile spreads for nondai ly strategies are statistically signiﬁcant
for lags of at least four days.
10
D. Time of Day
The return patterns in Figures 1 and 2 reﬂect average behavio r throughout the day. Investors
can pay up to three extra basis points, on average, to execute trades at a particular time of day.
However, it is possible this eﬀect is concentrated at certain times of the day. We ﬁrst investigate
whether the intraday pattern is an artifact of biases in open ing or closing prices. Overnight orders
are executed at the open, and many traders (for example, inde x funds concerned with minimizing
daily tracking error) place market-on-close orders. Tempo rary price distortions caused by opening
and closing procedures might produce predictability in sto ck returns that does not aﬀect stock
prices at other times of the day.
Table IV shows the excess return of winners minus losers deci le spread strategies during diﬀerent
half-hour intervals throughout the day. Since the nondaily eﬀect is mainly driven by bid-ask bounce,
we only report the results for the daily strategy. The full re sults are reported in the Internet
Appendix (Table IA.III). For Day 1, the daily decile spreads are sorted based on the returns for lag
13, while the nondaily spreads (in the Internet Appendix) ar e sorted based on the average returns
for lags one through 12. The return eﬀect is quite pronounced i n the ﬁrst and last half-hours of
trading. The Day 1 daily decile spread earns over 11 basis poi nts in the opening half-hour, while
the Day 1 nondaily strategy loses over eight basis points. Th is is a diﬀerence of 19 basis points
between these strategies in the opening half-hour. Similar ly, the Day 1 daily decile spread earns
over eight basis points near the close of trading, while the c orresponding nondaily strategy loses
11 basis points. A smaller eﬀect remains during the middle of t he day. The Day 1 daily strategy
earns positive average excess returns in every half-hour in terval from 10:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.,
averaging 1.75 basis points over this period. Meanwhile, th e Day 1 nondaily strategy declines in
nearly every half-hour period, losing 3.74 basis points per half-hour over this period. This is a
consistent pattern throughout the day. At longer lags, labe led Day 2 through Day 5 in Table IV,
the return patterns are of a similar shape but smaller in abso lute value. When we average the
second through twelfth intervals (that is, average returns from 10:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.), all the
daily spreads are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at convent ional levels while the nondaily spreads
are statistically signiﬁcant for Day 1 and Day 2.
[Table IV here]
Figure 4 shows that the periodic daily pattern of return stra tegies has a similar shape but
diﬀerent magnitudes at diﬀerent times of the day. The daily str ategies earn a premium in the ﬁrst
11
half-hour of trading, the last half-hour, and in the interme diate intervals from 10:00 to 3:30. This
evidence indicates that while the periodicity at daily inte rvals is stronger at the beginning and end
of the trading day (as can be seen from the magnitudes of the co eﬃcients in the left side of the
ﬁgure), it exists at all times (as can be seen from the magnitu des of the t-statistics in the right side
of the ﬁgure). 8 For the intermediate intervals there is more anticipation o f the periodicity at lag 13
since the coeﬃcients are signiﬁcantly positive for lags 10 t hrough 13. The top and bottom graphs in
Figure 4 show some leakage from the closing half-hour to the n ext day’s opening half-hour. Figure
4 is consistent with the argument that the patterns are mainl y, although not exclusively, driven by
trading at or near the opening or closing of the trading day.
[Figure 4 here]
II. Potential Cross-sectional Explanations
The pattern of daily return continuation has several potent ial explanations. One concern is the
eﬀect of data errors caused by thinly traded stocks. After add ressing this, we consider whether size
or risk can explain the return pattern. We also examine wheth er trading proﬁts of strategies based
on return periodicity are wiped out by paying the bid-ask spr ead.
A. Low Price and Thin Trading
A major concern is whether the return continuation is driven by thinly traded stocks with inac-
curately or irregularly measured returns. Returns on low-p riced stocks are most strongly aﬀected
by discreteness. However, since our sample is from the post- decimalization period, we do not expect
discreteness to be a major cause of return periodicity.
Many stocks may not be traded throughout a half-hour interva l. For example, a stock might
trade once at 12:01, and then a second time at 12:02, without a ny further activity before 12:30.
While it is not clear whether this would impart a daily patter n in measured returns, we verify
whether our results are contaminated by such inaccurate or i lliquid returns.
Table V addresses these issues by repeating the decile sprea d analysis of Table III while elimi-
nating low-priced and thinly traded stocks. We deﬁne low-pr iced stocks as stocks with share prices
below $5. Removing the low-priced stocks decreases the nond aily reversal eﬀect (reported in Inter-
net Appendix Table IA.IV). The average nondaily decile spre ad on Day 1 changes from -4.67 basis
points per half-hour in Table III to -1.77 basis points (with a t-statistic of -8.07) in the Internet
Appendix (Table IA.IV). Given that the reversals beyond lag k = 1 are driven by bid-ask bounce,
one would expect some attenuation since low-priced and thin ly traded stock tend to have higher
12
percentage spreads.
[Table V here]
The daily continuation eﬀect shrinks less than the nondaily r eversal eﬀect. Table V shows that
the daily decile spread earns 1.93 basis points (with a t-statistic of 10.34) on Day 1, whereas it
earns roughly three basis points with all stocks in Table III . In both Table III and Table V the
daily decile spread remains roughly one basis point per half -hour on Days 2 through 5.
To address problems of thin trading, we also eliminate stock s that do not have an average of
at least 10 trades per half-hour interval over the previous m onth. In other words, we use stocks
that average at least one trade every three minutes. This ret ains roughly 80% of the stocks in our
sample. The second column of Table V shows that this restrict ion does not aﬀect the results as
much as eliminating the low-priced stocks. The daily decile spread earns 2.45 basis points (with a t-
statistic of 18.44) per half-hour on Day 1, while the nondail y decile spread (in the Internet Appendix
(Table IA.IV)) loses 3.17 basis points (with a t-statistic of -19.44). Results on subsequent days are
similar to returns using the full sample, reported in Table I II. Overall, the reversal and continuation
patterns are not an artifact of mismeasurement of the return on low-priced stocks or mistiming of
returns on thinly traded stocks.
B. Size and Transactions Costs
A concern about the nature of intraday patterns in stock retu rns is market depth. If there is a
return premium at certain times of the day then it may be compe nsation for illiquidity that makes
stocks diﬃcult to trade at eﬃcient prices during those times . For example, Admati and Pﬂeiderer
(1988) develop a model where traders pool trades in certain p eriods of the day in order to take
advantage of the increased liquidity of pooling. This impli es a pattern primarily among smaller and
less liquid stocks that face larger adverse selection probl ems. To the extent that ﬁrm size proxies
for variation in adverse selection problems, it provides a c ontrol variable.
In Table VI we sort stocks into three groups based on market ca pitalization at the end of the
previous calendar year. In particular, the table reports th e decile spread strategies separately for
small-, medium-, and large-capitalization ﬁrms, where eac h group contains 33% of the sample.
The nondaily strategies on Day 1 (reported in the Internet Ap pendix (Table IA.V)) have returns
that are more negative among small ﬁrms. This is consistent w ith small-cap ﬁrms having larger
proportional spreads. The Day 1 nondaily decile spread lose s more than 10 basis points in the
opening half-hour and more than 22 basis points in the closin g half-hour, while averaging a loss of
13
more than eight basis points in the mid-day half-hour interv als. Conversely, the daily decile spread
strategies are more proﬁtable with small stocks. The Day 1 da ily strategy averages more than
ﬁve basis points per half-hour. In contrast, average return s are in the range of one to three basis
points for medium and large stocks. The average excess retur ns for strategies based on longer daily
and nondaily lags are smaller and do not diﬀer much across size categories. However, almost all
daily strategies maintain statistical signiﬁcance at the 9 5% level in all size categories at the open,
mid-day, and close. This indicates that while a liquidity/m icrostructure eﬀect explanation may
have merit, return periodicity is not associated exclusive ly with small ﬁrms.
[Table VI here]
An important consideration is the magnitude of transaction costs associated with the trading
strategies implicit in our reported returns. We ﬁnd predict able excess returns of several basis points
within a half-hour interval based on transaction prices. Ho wever, a trader with no other motive
for trade must pay the ask price or accept the oﬀer price to get i mmediate execution and avert
time slippage. Larger orders also lead to larger price impac ts. Table VII reports the decile spread
results for strategies that buy at the oﬀer and sell at the bid. The average results are negative for
all size categories at all times of the day, indicating that t he periodicity we ﬁnd does not indicate
a pure proﬁt opportunity. It is important to remember that th ese results involve the round-trip
transaction costs of two diﬀerent long-short decile strateg ies. Therefore, they incur the average cost
of four transactions. For example, among small stocks the av erage decile spread return on the Day
1 Nondaily strategy (reported in the Internet Appendix (Tab le IA.VI)) is -25.03 basis points, and
the average decile spread return on the Day 1 Daily strategy i s -23.78 basis points. The Internet
Appendix (Table IA.V) shows that the Day 1 Nondaily strategy lost 9.92 basis points among small
stocks while Table VI shows that the Day 1 Daily strategy gain ed 5.16 basis points. Comparing
the pre-transaction cost returns in Table VI to the post-spr ead return in Table VII, we see that the
implied one-way spread cost is between four and seven basis p oints. While the diﬀerence between
the performance of Daily and Nondaily strategies does not co ver the costs of two round-trips, it
often compares favorably with the magnitude of one-way tran saction costs. This suggests that
many investors have a demand for immediate execution of trad es and are not willing to shift their
trades by 30 minutes to take advantage of the periodicity.
[Table VII here]
14
These trading strategies are not likely to be proﬁtable for s tocks with large bid-ask spreads.
Therefore, the results in Table VII exclude stocks that have a quoted relative spread of more than
10 basis points at the beginning of a given trading interval. We also perform the analysis restricted
to stocks with spreads less than ﬁve and 25 basis points, resp ectively. The results are similar to
those in Table VII. Note that very few small stocks have sprea ds less than ﬁve basis points, so
there is no point conditioning on less than ﬁve basis points. Since our reported raw proﬁts are not
greater than 25 basis points, we do not condition on spreads g reater than 25 basis points. The
results suggest that it is quite diﬃcult to proﬁt from these t ype of intraday strategies without some
exogenous desire to trade.
The transaction costs for medium and large stocks are substa ntially smaller than those for small
stocks. Table VII shows that for medium stocks the average de cile spread results are roughly -20
basis points and for large stocks they are roughly -14 basis p oints. This corresponds to one-way
trading costs of less than ﬁve basis points. The losses of the Nondaily and Daily strategies in Table
VII and the Internet Appendix (Table IA.VI) are smaller for m edium and large stocks than for
small stocks.
Our evidence for the nondaily reversal eﬀect is consistent wi th the results of Avramov, Chordia,
and Goyal (2006), who ﬁnd that the reversals at weekly and mon thly intervals are smaller than
transactions costs.
C. Beta
If high frequency changes in risk or liquidity inﬂuence inve stors’ demand for assets, then we
might ﬁnd periodicity in returns due to periodicity in risk o r liquidity. For example, stocks might
be riskier at certain times of the day when news is released, o r they might be subject to institutional
transactions that follow a daily cycle. This section explor es these possibilities.
A priori, it seems unlikely for stocks to have large ﬂuctuati ons in systematic risks during the day
because companies do not change their ﬁnancial exposures fr om hour to hour. On the other hand,
some economic series are released at scheduled times, and ﬁr ms may have exposure to systematic
news released at those times. In this case traders may be relu ctant to hold stocks at these risky
times. To assess this possibility we control for risk by regr essing stock returns on the equal-
weighted market index. To correct for nonsynchronous tradi ng (Dimson (1979)), we include the
contemporaneous half-hour market return along with 13 lead s and lags. The Internet Appendix
(Table IA.VII) reports the average intercepts from these re gressions. Since the intraday interest
rate is eﬀectively zero, these intercepts have the interpret ation of risk-adjusted returns.
15
The results reported in the Internet Appendix (Table IA.VII ) resemble the previous results
using unadjusted average returns. The average risk-adjust ed return on decile return spreads of lag
13 winners in excess of lag 13 losers is 3.03 basis points. The decile spread has a risk-adjusted
return of -4.65 basis points when portfolios are formed on th e basis of returns over lags 1 through
12. These eﬀects are particularly pronounced in the ﬁrst half -hour and last half-hour of the day,
but remain statistically signiﬁcant in the middle of the day .
The average risk-adjusted returns for the daily decile spre ads continue to be substantial in the
opening and closing half-hour even when sorting on half-hou r returns up to ﬁve business days ago.
The Day 5 average decile spread for k = 65 is 4.84 basis points in the ﬁrst half-hour, and 3.42
basis points in the last half-hour. The eﬀect is much smaller i n the middle of the day, less than
one basis point, but remains statistically signiﬁcant. The refore, controlling for market risk does
not eliminate the daily pattern.
These results also show that the periodicity is not an artifa ct of all stocks having high returns
at certain times of the day and low returns at others, that is, simple mean shifts across half-hour
intervals. If this were driving the results, risk-adjusted returns should eliminate the eﬀect since the
risk adjustment takes out the market return. However, the ri sk-adjusted returns in the Internet
Appendix (Table IA.VII) are almost identical to the unadjus ted returns in Table IV.
III. V olume, Order Imbalance, and Related V ariables
Autocorrelated fund ﬂows and a preference for trades at part icular times of the day should lead
to periodicity in quantity variables (e.g., volume) and sig ned quantities (e.g., order imbalance),
and possibly also in volatility and liquidity. As discussed above, at the aggregate level there is an
extensive literature on intraday patterns in volume and vol atility. This literature is consistent with
periodicity in volume, order imbalance, volatility, and li quidity of the type observed in returns.
However, there may be diﬀerent intraday patterns that are als o consistent with this literature (for
example, an intraday step function in which the means of all v ariables are shifted each period). We
wish to determine whether these variables have periodicity similar to returns. If they do, we would
like to know if past observations of these variables explain the return periodicity. We ﬁnd common
periodic daily patterns in some of these variables, but show that these variables do not subsume
the pattern of return predictability.
All these variables are quite persistent in their levels, so the response coeﬃcients we observe by
estimating equation (1) look diﬀerent than those for returns in Figure 1. This is to be expected,
16
given what we know about volume (Lo and Wang (2006)), order im balance (Sadka (2006)), volatility
(Bollerslev (1986)), and liquidity (Korajczyk and Sadka (2 008)). In particular, the coeﬃcients using
levels of these variables are positive and decay very slowly . However, when we look at changes (order
imbalance) and percentage changes (volume, volatility, and spreads) in these variables, many display
patterns that look similar to the return patterns shown in Fi gure 1.
A. Volume and Order Imbalance
To address trading-demand explanations of periodicity, we repeat the cross-sectional regression
using volume data,
vi,t = ak,t + gk,tvi,t−k + ui,t, (3)
where vi,t is the percentage change in the volume of stock i traded over the half-hour interval t.
The means and t-statistics9 of the time series of volume responses are plotted in Panel A o f Figure
5. The pattern for ˆgt strongly resembles the return response pattern, ˆγt, in Figure 1. In particular,
the cross-sectional volume response eﬀects are uniformly ne gative at all lags except multiples of
13. Figure 5 shows the pattern for 65 lagged half-hour interv als corresponding to one week of
calendar lags. Like the pattern of return responses, the eﬀec t of volume responses lasts much
longer. The Internet Appendix (Figure IA.1) shows that the s trength of daily volume responses
decays with longer lags, but remains positive and statistic ally signiﬁcant for up to 520 half-hour
lags, corresponding to 40 days. Together Figures 1 and 5 (and the longer-term results in Figure
2 and the Internet Appendix) show that the intraday cross-se ctions of daily return and volume
display similar persistence lasting at least two months. No te that to the extent that volume and
volatility are correlated, the volume pattern is consisten t with the patterns in intraday volatility
documented in Andersen and Bollerslev (1997).
[Figure 5 here]
It is probable that orders of diﬀerent size convey diﬀerent inf ormation, and have diﬀerent ex-
ecution costs. Small trades are primarily generated by indi vidual investors, whereas large trades
are preponderantly institutional (Campbell, Ramadorai, a nd Schwartz (2009)). To check for dif-
ferential eﬀects of volume generated by orders of diﬀerent siz es, for each 30-minute interval we
determine the volume generated by trades of less than 1,000 s hares each (small trade volume) and
the volume generated by trades of greater than or equal to 1,0 00 shares each (large trade volume).
The Internet Appendix (Figure IA.2) shows the volume respon ses separately for small trades (Panel
A) and large trades (Panel B). Percentage changes in both sma ll- and large-trade volume exhibit
17
the same pattern of periodicity that we see in returns in Figu re 1 and in overall volume in Figure
5.
It is possible that institutions disguise large trades by br eaking them into smaller ones, making
it diﬃcult to detect their trades. Regardless of our ability to identify speciﬁc types of trades, price
pressure is presumably caused by one-sided volume, not by ba lanced trading. Therefore, we also
look at the behavior of changes in signed volume, order imbal ance. Order imbalance is deﬁned as
the net signed volume over the interval, where the sign is det ermined by a variant of the Lee and
Ready (1991) trade classiﬁcation algorithm. 10 For example, if a time interval had 100,000 shares
transacted that were classiﬁed as buyer-initiated and 75,0 00 shares transacted that were classiﬁed
as seller-initiated, then the order imbalance for the perio d would be 25,000 shares (equal to 100,000
- 75,000). Panel D of Figure 5 shows that changes in order imba lance exhibit periodicity similar to
but less pronounced than the periodicity in returns and volu me.
The Internet Appendix (Figure IA.2) indicates that order im balance does not exhibit any ad-
ditional periodicity when partitioned into small versus la rge trades, in contrast to the momentum
results of Hvidkjaer (2008). Indeed, the periodic pattern i s absent in the order imbalance for large
trades. Perhaps trade classiﬁcation algorithms for identi fying buyer-initiated versus seller-initiated
trades produce noisy estimates for individual stocks over s hort horizons such as the half-hour in-
tervals used here.
B. Volatility and Bid-Ask Spreads
Volatility tends to be high at the beginning and end of the tra ding day. In addition, Andersen
and Bollerslev (1997) ﬁnd high returns for the S&P 500 compos ite stock index futures contract at
the beginning and end of the day. It might be the case that move ments in volatility are driving the
return periodicity we observe here.
Movements in bid-ask spreads might also be related to moveme nts in volume, volatility, and
returns. For example, Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) derive a m odel in which traders who have
discretion on when to trade prefer to coordinate trading at t he same time. In this model, movements
in volume, volatility, and liquidity are related, in equili brium.
Figure 5 (Panel B) shows that percentage changes in volatili ty (measured by the absolute value
of returns) exhibit intraday periodicity similar to that fo und for returns and volume.
If market activity in individual stocks has daily periodici ty, then bid-ask spreads might follow
the same pattern. We examine this to distinguish changes in e xecution costs from changes in
underlying returns. In addition, since the high frequency r eturn bias discussed in Blume and
18
Stambaugh (1983) is related to bid-ask bounce, we wish to tes t whether the return patterns we
ﬁnd are related to systematic changes in bid-ask spreads. Pa nel C of Figure 5 shows the t-statistics
from cross-sectional regressions in which percentage chan ges in spreads are regressed on their lagged
values. Spreads do not exhibit the type of periodicity that w e observe in returns. Therefore, it
appears that the return periodicity is not merely an artifac t of a spread-induced bias in estimated
returns.
C. Does Periodicity in Related Variables Explain Periodicit y in Returns?
We have shown that volume, order imbalance, and volatility h ave cross-sectional predictability
with the same daily pattern as returns, whereas spreads do no t. We now turn to the question of
whether the periodicity in these variables explain the retu rn predictability we observe. For example,
daily patterns in institutional volume might aﬀect stock liq uidity and volatility at the same time
each day. News cycles might trigger volume that causes inves tors to demand return premiums on
a daily cycle.
To control for these additional variables, we run cross-sec tional regressions of returns on lagged
returns, including these additional lagged regressors. Th e regression is
ri,t = α k,t + γ k,tri,t−k + δ′
k,tVi,t−k + ei,t, (4)
where the vector Vi,t−k includes percentage changes in volume (total shares traded during the lagged
half-hour interval), volatility (absolute return), and re lative bid-ask spread; and absolute changes
in order imbalance. If return predictability is caused by pr edictable market activity based on these
variables, then including them should diminish or even subs ume the predictability of returns based
on past returns. The values of ˆγk and the associated t-statistics are reported in Figure 6.
[Figure 6 here]
Surprisingly, Figure 6 shows that the daily pattern of cross -sectional return predictability is
unaﬀected by including the additional regressors. In other w ords, volume, order imbalance, and
volatility have similar patterns of intraday predictabili ty, but these variables do not explain daily
return predictability.
As an additional reﬁnement, we also regress returns on lagge d returns, lagged small-trade vol-
ume, and lagged large-trade volume. The Internet Appendix ( Figure IA.2) reports the results. The
results show that the return periodicity is not subsumed by l arge- or small-volume either.
D. Pre-decimalization Results
19
We focus our analysis in this paper on the post-decimalizati on period. In Table VIII we compare
the return spreads on daily-frequency strategies (lags 13, 26, 39, 52, and 65) over our sample period
to two additional sample periods corresponding to tick size s of one-eighth and one-sixteenth of a
dollar. We ﬁnd that the statistical signiﬁcance of the intra day periodicity is greatest in the post-
decimalization period. This might be due to the increased us e of trading algorithms (of the sort
discussed above) by institutional investors. Results duri ng the period when the tick size is one-
sixteenth are quite unreliable and, hence, we present addit ional results in Table VIII, Panel B,
where the returns are Winsorized at the 1% level each month. T hat is, for each calendar month
and each strategy (e.g., lag 13) we set all observations belo w (above) the 1 st (99th) percentile to the
value of the 1 st (99th) percentile. The Winsorized results do not represent imple mentable trading
strategies, but reduce the inﬂuence of outliers. The Winsor ized results with one sixteenth tick
size resemble the post-decimalization results, with sligh tly larger coeﬃcients and slightly smaller t-
statistics. The larger coeﬃcients for the 1997 to 2000 perio d using the Winsorized estimator are not
consistent with the hypothesis that the increase in algorit hmic trading is driving the periodicity.
The Winsorized returns over the 1993 to 1997 period, when the minimum price increment was
one-eighth, have the smallest coeﬃcients and t-statistics.
[Table VIII here]
IV. Additional Diagnostics
The previous sections demonstrate a pattern of daily return continuation. This pattern is
concentrated at the open and close, but also persists throug hout the day and lasts for many days.
Because of the novelty of this eﬀect, it is important to verify that we have properly characterized
the pattern (pervasive and not restricted to special days or periods). This section examines the
pattern at a higher frequency and for diﬀerent calendar perio ds.
A. Five-Minute Interval Returns
Figure 1 shows that when using half-hour intervals, sometim es there appears to be slight spillover
from one time interval to adjacent intervals. While the retu rn responses are most positive at exact
multiples of one trading day (e.g., 13-half-hour lags), the y are often slightly positive at adjacent
intervals too (e.g., 12 or 14 half-hour lags). In this sense t he choice of half-hour intervals seems
adequate.
It is conceivable, however, that our choice of interval mask s higher frequency phenomena. In ad-
dition, we would like to ensure that our results are not sensi tive to the exact methodological choices.
20
Therefore, we recalculate returns over ﬁve-minute interva ls and estimate the return responses of
equation (1). In this case there are 78 ﬁve-minute intervals during a trading day (omitting overnight
returns).
Figure 7 shows these high-frequency results. Figure 7 looks like a noisy version of Figure 1.
The negative return reversal is most pronounced for the ﬁrst few ﬁve-minute lags, but persists for
several days. And while there is a clear daily eﬀect at daily mu ltiples of 78 lags, the leakage of
the neighboring ﬁve-minute intervals is also apparent. Ove rall, this graph conﬁrms the previous
results and indicates that the half-hour return intervals a re ﬁne enough to faithfully characterize
high frequency returns.
[Figure 7 here]
B. Day of Week
A potential concern is the existence day-of-the-week eﬀects . French (1980) ﬁnds that the stock
market earns diﬀerent average returns on diﬀerent days of the w eek. In particular, average returns
on the day following a weekend are lower than average returns on other days. Therefore, we check
whether our daily eﬀect is driven by a weekend eﬀect or part of so me other weekly pattern.
The Internet Appendix (Table IA.VIII) shows the performanc e of our daily and nondaily decile
spread strategies on diﬀerent days of the week. The eﬀect is rem arkably consistent throughout the
week. The Day 1 nondaily strategy loses money at the open, mid -day, and close on every day. The
amounts range from -3.51 basis points on Thursdays to -6.14 b asis points on Mondays. Meanwhile
the Day 1 daily strategy earns a positive premium when averag ed over all half-hour intervals. This
ranges from 2.62 basis points on Tuesdays to 3.44 basis point s on Wednesdays. The results for
longer lags are weaker, but they have the same sign and are usu ally statistically signiﬁcant at the
5% level. We conclude that the daily results are not limited t o a weekend eﬀect or other weekday
pattern.
C. Calendar Month and Turn-of-Month
There are well-known monthly patterns in the stock market. T his includes both market-wide
January eﬀects and year-long seasonality (Rozeﬀ and Kinney ( 1976), Bouman and Jacobsen (2002),
and Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003)) and cross-sectional r eturn patterns such as the size eﬀect
at the turn of the year (Keim (1983)). In addition to ruling ou t weekday eﬀects, we want to ensure
that the daily pattern is not an artifact of some other monthl y seasonal phenomenon.
The Internet Appendix (Table IA.IX) reports the decile spre ad strategies for every calendar
21
month. Again, the results are strikingly consistent. The Da y 1 nondaily strategy loses money in
every calendar month, ranging from -2.88 basis points in Jun e to -5.90 basis points in March. And
the Day 1 daily strategy makes money in every month, ranging f rom 1.70 basis points in March to
7.80 basis points in November. The longer lag strategies hav e a similar pattern, albeit smaller and
less consistent. Nevertheless, the Day 5 daily strategy is s till proﬁtable in every calendar month.
The results are not limited to a particular time of year, and c ertainly not limited to the turn of the
year.
While the results are not limited to turn of the year seasonal ity, they might be driven by intra-
month patterns. Ariel (1987) shows that stocks earn a premiu m near the beginning and end of
calendar months.
The Internet Appendix (Table IA.X) controls for turn-of-mo nth eﬀects by separately reporting
the combined results for trading days that occur on the ﬁrst o r last day of the month. The results
are remarkably consistent. The Day 1 and Day 2 nondaily strat egies lose money at the open,
mid-day, and close at both the turn of the month and the middle of the month, while the daily
strategies make money at all times. With few exceptions the D ay 3, 4, and 5 strategies maintain
this pattern. The pattern is thus not related to turn-of-the -month eﬀects.
D. Index Membership
If stocks rise and fall at the same time of day, then presumabl y there are buyers and sellers who
persistently trade them at those times (with persistence in the direction of the trade). Index funds
and benchmarked mutual funds are natural suspects for these actions. These funds may have large
daily inﬂows or outﬂows and have an inelastic demand to inves t those funds to replicate the index.
To economize on trading activity they might perform “basket trades” at the open of trade, and to
minimize tracking error they would have a motivation to trad e near the close. This is consistent
with previous results showing a strong eﬀect at these times.
As a very rough cut at dealing with index fund behavior, we div ide the sample between ﬁrms
in the S&P 500 and those that are not. The Internet Appendix (T able IA.XI) separates the decile
spread results for S&P 500 ﬁrms and non-S&P 500 ﬁrms. The resu lts for both daily and non-daily
strategies are generally stronger among the non-S&P 500 sto cks. For example, the average decile
spread based on the previous nondaily returns loses 5.58 bas is points in the non-S&P 500 stocks,
but loses less than one basis point in the S&P 500 index stocks . The Day 1 daily strategy earns
3.28 basis points with the non-S&P 500 stocks, but earns only 2.19 basis points with the index
stocks. This diﬀerence masks some interesting variation acr oss the day. The closing-period daily
22
eﬀect is much larger, relative to the intraday eﬀect, for the S& P 500 stocks. For example, the
ratio of the last period to intraday daily returns for Day 1 is 9.61 (9.42/0.98) for S&P 500 stocks
and 4.94 for non-S&P 500 stocks. The daily eﬀect is larger for S &P 500 stocks in absolute terms
for Days 1 through 3, and in relative terms (versus the mid-da y period) for all ﬁve days. For the
opening half-hour the daily eﬀects are smaller in absolute te rms but larger in relative terms for
S&P stocks. The large relative daily eﬀect in the closing-per iod for S&P 500 stocks is consistent
with index fund trading at the close driving some of the daily eﬀect. Similar eﬀects are shown for
large versus small ﬁrms (reported above in Table IV), so it is not clear whether this eﬀect is an
index eﬀect or a large capitalization eﬀect.
V. Conclusion
A growing literature suggests that institutional investme nt ﬂows inﬂuence asset prices (e.g.,
Harris and Gruel (1986), Coval and Staﬀord (2007), Boyer (200 8), He and Krishnamurthy (2008),
Lou (2008), Vayanos and Woolley (2008)). We postulate that s ystematic trading and institutional
fund ﬂows lead to predictable patterns, not only in trading v olume and order imbalances, but also
in returns of common stocks. We study the periodicity of cros s-sectional diﬀerences in returns
using half-hour observation intervals in the period from Ja nuary 2001 through December 2005. We
document pronounced intraday return reversals due to bid-a sk bounce, and these reversals last for
several trading days. The market recovers from shocks to dep th in less than 60 minutes. However,
we ﬁnd signiﬁcant continuation of returns at intervals that are multiples of a day and this eﬀect
lasts for at least 40 trading days. This daily periodicity is of the same order of magnitude as current
institutional commission rates and the quoted half-spread .
Changes in trading volume, order imbalances, and volatilit y exhibit similar patterns, but do
not explain the return patterns. The return continuation at daily frequencies is more pronounced
for the ﬁrst and last half-hour periods. These eﬀects are not d riven by ﬁrm size, systematic risk
premia, or inclusion in the S&P 500 index (as a proxy for tradi ng by index funds). The pattern
is also not driven by particular months of the year, days of th e week, or by turn-of-the-month
eﬀects. The periodicity at the daily frequency is observed wh en we also use bid-to-bid, ask-to-ask,
or midpoint-to-midpoint returns, which implies that the pe riodicity is not merely due to patterns
of where transactions prices occur relative to bid and ask pr ices.
The results are consistent with investors having a predicta ble demand for immediacy at certain
times of the day. The pattern does not present a proﬁt opportu nity in the absence of other motives
23
to trade, since strategies that attempt to take advantage of the daily periodicity lose money, after
paying the bid-ask spread. However, the magnitude of the ret urn pattern is sizeable relative to
several components of transactions costs such as commissio ns and eﬀective spreads.
24
References
Admati, Anat, and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1988, Theory of intra-day patterns: Volume and price variabil-
ity, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3-40.
Almgren, Robert, and Neil Chriss, 2000, Optimal execution o f portfolio transactions, Journal of
Risk 3, 5-39.
Almgren, Robert, and Julian Lorenz, 2006, Bayesian adaptiv e trading with a daily cycle, Journal
of Trading 1, 38-46.
Andersen, Torben G., and Tim Bollerslev, 1997, Intraday per iodicity and volatility persistence in
ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 115-158.
Ariel, Robert A., 1987, A monthly eﬀect in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 18,
161-174.
Avramov, Doron, Tarun Chordia, and Amit Goyal, 2006, Liquid ity and autocorrelations in indi-
vidual stock returns, Journal of Finance 61, 2365-2394.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, and Andrew W. Lo, 1998, Optimal contro l of execution costs, Journal of
Financial Markets 1, 1-50.
Blackburn, Douglas W., William N. Goetzmann, and Andrey D. U khov, 2007, Risk aversion and
clientele eﬀects, Working paper, Indiana University.
Blume, Marshall E., and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1983, Biases in computed returns: An application
to the size eﬀect, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 387-404.
Bollerslev, Tim, 1986, Generalized autoregressive condit ional heteroskedasticity, Journal of Econo-
metrics 31, 307-327.
Bouman, Sven, and Ben Jacobsen, 2002, The Halloween indicat or, ‘Sell in May and go away’:
Another puzzle, American Economic Review 92, 1618-1635.
Boyer, Brian H., 2008, Comovement among stocks with similar book-to-market ratios, Working
paper, Brigham Young University.
Breen, William J., Laurie Simon Hodrick, and Robert A. Koraj czyk, 2002, Predicting equity liq-
uidity, Management Science 48, 470-483.
Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, 200 9, Caught on tape: Institutional
trading, stock returns, and earnings announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 92,
66–91.
Carhart, Mark M., Ron Kaniel, David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed , 2002, Leaning for the tape:
Evidence of gaming behavior in equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 58, 661-693.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, Evidence on the speed of
convergence to market eﬃciency, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 271-292.
Coppejans, Mark, Ian Domowitz, and Ananth Madhavan, 2004, R esiliency in an automated auction,
Working paper, ITG, Inc.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Staﬀord, 2007, Asset ﬁre sales (and pu rchases) in equity markets, Journal
of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2002, The determinant s of the ﬂow of funds of managed
portfolios: Mutual funds vs. pension funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
37, 523-557.
Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subje ct to infrequent trading, Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 197-226.
Engle, Robert, and Robert Ferstenberg, 2007, Execution ris k: It’s the same as investment risk,
Journal of Trading 2, 10-20.
25
Fama, Eugene F., 1976, Foundations of Finance (Basic Books, New York).
Fama Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2008, Dumb money: Mutu al fund ﬂows and the cross-
section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299–322.
French, Kenneth R., 1980, Stock returns and the weekend eﬀect , Journal of Financial Economics
8, 55-69.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Lawrence E. Harris, 1988, Estimat ing the components of the bid/ask
spread, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 123-142.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Goyenko, Ruslan Y., Craig W. Holden, and Charles A. Trzcinka , 2009, Do liquidity measures
measure liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153-181.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn, 2000, Active Portfolio Management: A Quantitative
Approach for Producing Superior Returns and Selecting Supe rior Returns and Controlling
Risk, 2nd edition (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Gurliacci, Mark, David Jeria, and George Soﬁanos, 2009, Whe n the going gets tough, the algos get
going, Journal of Trading 4, 34-44.
Harris, Lawrence, 1986, A transaction data study of weekly a nd intradaily patterns in stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 16, 99-117.
Harris, Lawrence, and Eitan Gurel, 1986, Price and volume eﬀe cts associated with changes in
the S&P 500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pres sures, Journal of Finance 41,
815–829.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2009, Trading costs and returns for U.S. eq uities: Estimating eﬀective costs from
daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445-1477.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008, Intermediary a sset pricing, Working paper, North-
western University.
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menk veld, 2009, Does algorithmic trading
improve liquidity? Working paper, University of Californi a, Berkeley.
Heston, Steven L., and Ronnie Sadka, 2008a, Seasonality in t he cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 418-445.
Heston, Steven L., and Ronnie Sadka, 2008b, Seasonality in t he cross-section of stock returns: The
international evidence, Forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis .
Holden, Craig W., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2002, News ev ents, information acquisition, and
serial correlation, Journal of Business 75, 1-32.
Hora, Merrell, 2006, Tactical liquidity trading and intrad ay volume, Working paper, Credit Suisse.
Huberman, Gur, and Werner Stanzl, 2005, Optimal Liquidity T rading, Review of Finance 9, 165–
200.
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2008, Small trades and the cross-sectio n of stock returns, Review of Financial
Studies 21, 1123-1151.
Jain, Prem C., and Gun-Ho Joh, 1988, The dependence between h ourly prices and trading volume,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 269-283.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable beha vior of security returns, Journal of
Finance 45, 881-898.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market eﬃciency. Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
26
Jeria, David, and George Soﬁanos, 2008, Algo evolution: Fro m 4Cast to OptimIS and lower short-
fall, Street Smart 37, 1-5.
Kamstra, Mark J., Lisa A. Kramer, and Maurice D. Levi, 2003, W inter blues: Seasonal aﬀective
disorder (SAD) stock market returns, American Economic Review 93, 324-343.
Keim, Donald B., 1983, Size-related anomalies and stock ret urn seasonality: Further evidence,
Journal of Financial Economics 12, 13-32.
Keim, Donald B., 1989, Trading patterns, bid-ask spreads, a nd estimated security returns: The
case of common stocks at calendar turning points, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 75-97.
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Ronnie Sadka, 2004, Are momentum p roﬁts robust to trading costs?
Journal of Finance 59, 1039-1082.
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Ronnie Sadka, 2008, Pricing the co mmonality across alternative mea-
sures of liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 45-72.
Large, Jeremy, 2007, Measuring the resiliency of an electro nic limit order book, Journal of Financial
Markets 10, 1–25.
Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade d irection from intraday data, Journal
of Finance 46, 733-754.
Lehmann, Bruce, 1990, Fads, martingales and market eﬃcienc y, Quarterly Journal of Economics
105, 1-28.
Lehmann, Bruce N., and David M. Modest, 2005, Diversiﬁcatio n and the optimal construction of
basis portfolios, Management Science 51, 581–598.
Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1990, When are contrar ian proﬁts due to stock market
overreaction? Review of Financial Studies 3, 175-208.
Lo, Andrew W., and Jiang Wang, 2006, Trading volume: Implica tions of an intertemporal capital
asset pricing model, Journal of Finance 61, 2805-2840.
Lou, Dong, 2008, A ﬂow-based explanation for return predict ability, Working paper, Yale Univer-
sity.
Pagano, Michael S., Lin Peng, and Robert A. Schwartz, 2008, T he quality of price formation
at market openings and closings: Evidence from the Nasdaq st ock market, Working paper,
Villanova University.
Roll, Richard, 1984, A simple implicit measure of the eﬀectiv e bid-ask spread in an eﬃcient market,
Journal of Finance 39, 1127-1139.
Rozeﬀ, Michael S., and William R. Kinney, 1976, Capital marke t seasonality: The case of stock
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 379-402.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2006, Momentum and post-earnings-announce ment drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309–349.
Stoll, Hans R., 1978, The supply of dealer services in securi ties markets, Journal of Finance 33,
1133-1151.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under un certainty: Heuristics and biases,
Science 185, 1124-1131.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2001, Strategic trading in a dynamic nois y market, Journal of Finance 56, 131-
171.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Paul Woolley, 2008, An institutional theory of momentum and reversal,
Working paper, London School of Economics.
Wood, Robert A., Thomas H. McInish, and J. Keith Ord, 1985, An investigation of transactions
data for NYSE stocks, Journal of Finance 40, 723-739.
27
F ootnotes
1. Following Fama (1976), these responses have the interpre tation of excess returns on cost-
less portfolios that have excess returns of 100% in a previou s half-hour interval.
2. We use Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics, which assume no autocorrelation in the
coeﬃcients of the cross-sectional regressions, because we ﬁnd no evidence of signiﬁcant autocorre-
lation in the estimates, ˆγ k.
3. The Internet Appendix is available on the Journal of Finance web site, at
http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp.
4. The returns on the separate winners and losers portfolios are available in the Internet
Appendix (Table IA.II).
5. An 8% equity risk premium corresponds to approximately 3. 2 basis points per trading
day (that is, 800/250).
6. Korajczyk and Sadka (2004), Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcink a (2009), and Hasbrouck
(2009) ﬁnd larger quoted spreads. However, these papers hav e sample periods that include both
pre-decimalization data and some include less liquid stock s.
7. In the Internet Appendix (Table IA.XI) we estimate the ret urn spread for S&P 500 stocks
(which is the sample studied in Gurliacci, et al.) to be 2.19 b asis points.
8. In the Internet Appendix (Figure IA.3) we present a versio n of Figure 4 that uses diﬀerent
scaling of the return results, which makes it easier to disce rn the return patterns for the mid-day
period.
9. The estimates, ˆgt,k, do not display substantial autocorrelation so we do not mak e adjust-
ments to the Fama-MacBeth standard errors.
10. Given the increased transactions volume in our sample pe riod relative to that in Lee and
Ready (1991), we do not require their ﬁve second minimum peri od between quotes and transactions.
28