Intraday time series momentum: global
evidence and links to market
characteristics

Article

Accepted Version

Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 4.0


Li, Z., Sakkas, A. and Urquhart, A. ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8834-4243 (2022) Intraday time
series momentum: global evidence and links to market
characteristics. Journal of Financial Markets, 57. 100619.
ISSN 1386-4181 doi: 10.1016/j.finmar.2021.100619 Available
at https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/95566/





It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the
work.  See Guidance on citing  .

To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2021.100619

Publisher: Elsevier



All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law,
including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other
copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in
the End User Agreement  .
www.reading.ac.uk/centaur
CentAUR
Central Archive at the University of Reading
Reading’s research outputs online
        Intraday Time Series Momentum: International Evidence

                       Zeming Lia,∗, Athanasios Sakkasb, Andrew Urquhartc

               aSouthampton Business School, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
                                        email: zeming.li@soton.ac.uk
           bNottingham University Business School, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
                                 email: athanasios.sakkas@nottingham.ac.uk
               cICMA Centre, Henley Business School, University of Reading, Reading, UK
                                    email: a.j.urquhart@icmacentre.ac.uk



Abstract

This paper provides the ﬁrst study of intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) in a global
setting.  By studying 16 developed markets, we show that ITSM is both economically and
statistically signiﬁcant around the world.  Although global commonality across individual
markets is limited, stronger regional commonality is observed.  We also ﬁnd that the US
ﬁrst half-hour return exhibits cross-country intraday predictability which is economically
exploitable.  A global equally-weighted ITSM portfolio generates signiﬁcant alphas against
global equity factors and a time-varying factor manifests as a major contributor.  Finally,
market micro-characteristics like liquidity provision and information continuity are shown to
be associated with ITSM.
Keywords:   High frequency trading, Intraday, International markets, Momentum
JEL classiﬁcation: G11, G14, G15, G17






























   ∗Corresponding author.

                                                       1
1. Introduction

    In the asset return predictability literature, momentum is a well-known phenomenon
in ﬁnancial markets and suggests that assets that perform well in the past continue to
perform well in the future.  Since the seminal work byJegadeesh and Titman(1993), the
eﬀect has been well established and attracted signiﬁcant interest from both academics and
practitioners.   For example,Chan et al.(1996),Hong and Stein(1999),Moskowitz and
Grinblatt(1999),Jegadeesh and Titman(2001),George and Hwang(2004),Barroso and
Santa-Clara(2015), andDaniel and Moskowitz(2016) examine momentum in the cross-
section of US stock returns both empirically and theoretically, whileGriﬃn et al.(2003),
Liu et al.(2011),Menkhoﬀ et al.(2012),Fama and French(2012), andAsness et al.(2013)
provide international evidence in a broader collection of asset classes. Moreover,Moskowitz
et al.(2012) reveal a momentum eﬀect in the time-series of asset returns, that has also been
extensively studied in a variety of asset classes and factors both in- and outside of the US
(Georgopoulou and Wang(2016),Goyal and Wahal(2015),Gupta and Kelly(2019),Ham
et al.(2019),He and Li(2015),Huang et al.(2019),Hurst et al.(2017),Kim et al.(2016),
Lim et al.(2018), andMoskowitz et al.(2012)).
    While most forms of momentum are studied at monthly, weakly, or daily frequency
settings, the rise of technology has led to a substantial increase in high-frequency trading
(HFT). As noted byMalceniece et al.(2019), the scale of HFT activity varies depending on
the market and how broadly HFT is deﬁned, but there is no doubt that HFT accounts for a
large share of trading volume in most developed markets. The impact of HFT has changed
thewaytraderstrade, the way markets arestructured, andhowliquidityandprice discovery
arise (O’Hara(2015)). Therefore HFT has had a fundamental impact on markets which has
led many academic studies to start examining the trading behavior of ﬁnancial markets at
a much higher frequency (Brogaard et al.(2014),Chaboud et al.(2014), andHendershott
and Riordan(2013)).
    In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst cross-country study on intraday momentum based
on the work ofGao et al.(2018).Gao et al.(2018), analyzing US ETFs, provide strong
evidence of intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) that the ﬁrst half-hour return of the
trading day signiﬁcantly predicts the last half-hour return.   We show that this ITSM is

                                                       2
economically and statistically signiﬁcant in the international stock markets.  However, we
ﬁnd that the pervasiveness of the eﬀect does not necessarily translate into a strong global
common risk factor, leaving space for constructing global intraday time-series momentum
(GITSM) portfolios that provide economic gains on top of individual country ITSM portfo-
lios. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the US ﬁrst half-hour return possesses strong predictability on
the last half-hour returns of international markets and that this cross-country predictability
is economically exploitable. In addition, we identify a time varying component that largely
explains the proﬁtability of the GITSM. We also ﬁnd that ITSM is strongly associated with
certain market micro-characteristics such as liquidity provision and information absorption.
    Our research contributes to the existing literature in ﬁve ways.   Firstly, we conﬁrm
both the economic and statistical signiﬁcance of the intraday momentum eﬀect across global
markets.  Speciﬁcally, we follow the standard predictive regression approach inGao et al.
(2018)andregressthelasthalf-hourreturnagainsttheﬁrsthalf-hourreturnoneachofthe16
developedmarketsinoursample, respectively. Ourresultsrevealsigniﬁcantpredictabilityof
the ﬁrst half-hour return to the last half-hour return in 12 out of 16 markets. This intraday
predictability is also conﬁrmed in various market conditions.  We also perform a thorough
out-of-sample(OOS)evaluation,ofwhichtheresultsimplysigniﬁcantOOSforecastingpower
(of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the last half-hour return) in most countries.
    To further assess the economic signiﬁcance of the strong predictability shown in the
statistical analysis, we followGao et al.(2018) and compare the performance of a simple
market timing ITSM strategy with that of two passive investment strategies:  always-long
thatrepeatedlytakeslongpositioninthelasthalf-houreverydayand buy-and-hold thatholds
a long position throughout the whole sample period.  Individual country ITSM strategies
generate signiﬁcant alphas ranging between 2.66% and 7.45% (2.60% and 7.28%) per year
when regressed against the always-long (buy-and-hold) strategies. Collectively, our evidence
conﬁrms the eﬀect of intraday time-series momentum in the international setting and is
consistent with the US evidence found inGao et al.(2018).
    Secondly, we document a modest comovement of ITSM across equity markets that is
slightly stronger among countries that are geographically clustered. Following the method-
ology from the liquidity commonality literature (Brockman et al.(2009) andChordia et al.


                                                      3
(2000)) along with a principal component analysis, we ﬁnd a modest comovement of ITSM
across equity markets suggesting the existence of a common global factor that can only ex-
plain a small proportion of the variation in global ITSM. On the other hand, repeating the
principal component analysis with geographically grouped data implies relatively stronger
regional commonality.
    Thirdly, we show that the US ﬁrst half-hour return exhibits cross-country intraday pre-
dictability.Rapach et al.(2013) document the leading predictive role of the US market on
its international counterparts at monthly frequency. It is then natural to examine whether
this cross-country predictability of the US market holds at intraday level.  We tackle this
issue by regressing the last half-hour return of the international markets against the US
ﬁrst half-hour return.  With the local ﬁrst half-hour return included as a control variable,
the US ﬁrst half-hour return manifests statistically strong predictability in more than half
of the markets; and the predictiveR2 (adjusted) increases in all but one of the countries
after the inclusion of the US returns. Our analysis therefore implies that the cross-country
predictability of the US market inRapach et al.(2013) exists even at intraday level.
    Fourthly, we ﬁnd that investing in ITSM globally produces signiﬁcant economic gains
than investing individually. We propose three types of GITSM portfolios that are based on
individual ITSM, regional equally-weighted ITSM, and the US ﬁrst half-hour return signal.
For each type of GITSM, we adopt six portfolio weighting schemes: equally-weighted, value-
weighted,inversevariance(KirbyandOstdiek(2012)),maximum-diversiﬁcation(Choueifaty
and Coignard(2008)), mean-variance, and minimum-variance, resulting in total 18 global
portfolios.  Eleven out of the 18 portfolios yield a Sharpe ratio that is greater than one,
ranging from 1.01 to 1.77. Most strategies yield remarkable positive spanning alphas when
regressed against individual ITSM strategies, implying that the global intraday momentum
strategies subsume the country individual ones and provide considerable economic gains.
In contrast, when we regress individual ITSM against the global portfolios, only Norway
persistently exhibits positive and signiﬁcant alphas. It is worth noting that among the three
types of GITSM proposed, the one based on the US intraday ﬁrst half hour return signal is
the strongest.
    We further ﬁnd that the global ITSM portfolio returns cannot be explained by global


                                                       4
equity factors, generating signiﬁcant alphas of nearly 3%. But where do these alphas come
from?Goyal and Jegadeesh(2018) show that the time-series momentum ofMoskowitz et al.
(2012) incorporates a time-varying market factor that is responsible for the out-performance
oftheformerwithrespecttothecross-sectionalmomentumofJegadeeshandTitman(1993).
Consistent withGoyal and Jegadeesh(2018), we identify a time-varying global investment
factor which constitutes a signiﬁcant source of the strategy proﬁtability.   We show that
this time-varying factor explains around 73% of the variation of the global portfolio return
and emanates from market timing rather than stock index picking ability, attributed to the
positive autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and the last hour returns in the global market.
    Finally, we show that ITSM is closely related to certain market micro-characteristics
such as liquidity provision and information digestion process.Gao et al.(2018) assert that
the ITSM eﬀect is originated from the overnight information accumulation and suggest two
possible explanations. The ﬁrst explanation is the infrequent trading behavior of investors
thathasbeendocumentedbothempiricallyandtheoreticallyintheliterature(Bogousslavsky
(2016),Duﬃe(2010),Heston et al.(2010), andRakowski and Wang(2009)).  The model
byBogousslavsky(2016) suggests that the infrequent traders who absorb a liquidity shock
by taking sub-optimal position will have the intention to unload the sub-optimal position at
the next active period, causing another liquidity shock that is in the same direction as the
original one. Based on this model, we hypothesize that ITSM has association with market
liquidityprovision. Therationaleisthatwhenthemarketisilliquid(liquid),boththeoriginal
and the second liquidity shocks should have larger market impact causing stronger (weaker)
pricemovementsinthesamedirection. WetestthishypothesisbygroupingindividualITSM
basedontheCorwinandSchultz(2012)liquiditymeasurecomputedfromtheﬁrsthalfhour,
and evaluate equally-weighted ITSM across groups.  The second explanation given byGao
et al.(2018) is the existence of traders who are slow in receiving or processing information.
We relate this suggested justiﬁcation to the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ hypothesis ofDa et al.(2014),
wherein investor under-react to the information that is slowly incorporated into the price
and over-react to the information that comes as a surprise. Therefore, our second hypothesis
is that ITSM is stronger when the overnight information is digested smoothly and weaker
when the market reacts swiftly with strong emotion. Similar to testing the ﬁrst hypothesis,


                                                       5
we group individual ITSM by ‘information discreteness’ (ID) that is introduced byDa et al.
(2014), and evaluate the equally-weighted portfolios across groups.  Our empirical analysis
supports both hypotheses.
    Our paper is also related to recent academic studies addressing intraday return pre-
dictability and ﬁnancial market microstructure from a cross-sectional perspective.  For ex-
ample,Lou et al.(2019) relate ﬁrm-level intraday momentum and overnight reversal to
investor heterogeneity. Xu(2017) uses intraday predictability for long-term portfolio con-
struction whileFishe et al.(2019) study the relationship between anticipatory traders and
high-frequency momentum trading. While these studies mainly focus on the cross-sectional
predictability of US stocks or commodity future market returns, our work adds to the liter-
ature on the time-series of international stock return intraday predictability.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section2describes the data.  Section
3examines the pervasiveness of intraday time-series momentum around the world both
statistically and economically.   Section4investigates the commonality among individual
ITSM portfolios and explores the cross-country predictability of the US market.  Section5
evaluates the economic meaningfulness of investing ITSM globally. Section ?? proposes two
hypotheses and studies ITSM with two market micro-characteristics. Section7concludes.


2. Data and Intraday Returns

2.1.  Data

    We collect 1-minutely quote data from the Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH)
database of stock market indices1 and restrict our analysis to developed markets classiﬁed
by the MSCI.2,3 We restrict our analysis to developed markets since intraday data are very
illiquid in emerging and frontier markets. The dataset provides information on stock market
indices based on the local currency, and consists of information on trading time, open price,



    1Country-speciﬁc ETFs are available; however they lack liquidity and a long enough history to provide

a robust study.
    2For a detailed description of this database please refer toFong et al.(2017).

    3We classify the developed countries following the MSCI market classiﬁcation guide https://www.msci.

com/market-cap-weighted-indexes.


                                                        6
high price, low price and last price for every trading minute.
    In order to process the high-frequency dataset, we broadly follow the data-cleaning steps
outlined inBarndorﬀ-Nielson et al.(2009) andHollstein et al.(2019), with a few additions.
First, we exclude Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Israel and Italy since TRTH does not provide
liquid data for these countries for a long enough period for our study.4 Second, we use only
data with a time-stamp during the exchange trading hours for that market.  For instance,
we use data for the US market between 9:30AM and 4:00PM Eastern Standard Time and in
Table1we report all market trading hours for each market studied.           5 Third, we remove all
non-trading days and recording errors. To be more speciﬁc, we ﬁlter out extreme prices that
are higher (lower) than 1.2 (0.8) of the highest (lowest) daily price over the sample period,
recorded on Thomson Reuters Datastream.
    Finally, in order to study the economic signiﬁcance of ITSM in a portfolio setting, we
take the perspective of US dollar investor, and hence we convert all local currency data into
US dollars.6  Speciﬁcally, we convert index prices based on the contemporaneous 1-minute
exchange rate.  We exclude Hong Kong and Singapore from our sample due to the lack of
1-minutelyforeignexchangedata. Ofthe16remainingMSCIdevelopedcountries, datafrom
Sweden starts 4th October 2005 and therefore we take that as our start date for all countries
and the end date is 29th December 2017, thereby capturing over 12 years’ worth of data.
Table1tabulates the list of the 16 developed stock market indices employed in this study
along with their RICs and trading hours.

                                             [Table 1 about here.]



    4For these countries, there are many missing values throughout the sample and even aggregating to the

30-minute frequency still leaves many missing values.
    5For some countries, the trading records do not correspond to the trading hours, and exceed market

closing time with observations that remain unchanged. This is mostly pronounced over the early period of
our sample.  To address this issue we use the timestamp of the ﬁrst observation on a day as opening time
and the timestamp of the last actively changed observation as closing time.
    6Though some scholars argue that using US dollar as the common numeraire might generate misleading

conclusionsonreturnpredictability(Jordanetal.(2015)), ourapproachisconsistentwithLawrenzandZorn
(2017) and the evidence reported in TableB.1andB.2ofAppendix  Bshows stronger intraday time-series
momentum eﬀect when using local currency.

                                                          7
2.2.  Calculation of the ﬁrst and last half-hour returns

    FollowingHeston et al.(2010),Komarov(2017) andGao et al.(2018) among others, we
divide each trading day into 30-minute non-overlapping intervals.Gao et al.(2018) show
that the length of the intervals does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect intraday time-series momentum
since most news and announcements are released overnight; hence, investors need a short
time period to digest the information after (before) the markets open (close). In this study,
we focus only on the ﬁrst and the last half-hour returns due to the heterogeneity of the
market setting across countries.7 The ﬁrst and last half-hour returns are deﬁned as follows:

                               rFt  =pfirst30,tpclose,t−1−1,   rLt  =pclose,tplast30,t−1,                                   (1)

whererFt  denotes the ﬁrst half-hour return on dayt,pfirst30,t stands for the last price in the
ﬁrst 30 minutes after market open on dayt,pclose,t−1 is the closing price on dayt−1,rLt
is the last half-hour return on dayt,plast30,t is the ﬁrst price in the last 30 minutes before
market close on dayt, andpclose,t is the closing price on dayt. Note that for the calculation
of the ﬁrst half-hour return we also take the overnight information into account.

                                            [Table 2 about here.]

    Table2presents summary statistics of the annualized ﬁrst and last half-hour returns and
reports the number of days, mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis.  Excluding
SpainandSweden,themeanreturnforallmarketsintheﬁrsthalfhourissubstantiallyhigher
and more volatile than in the last half hour. The high return during the ﬁrst half hour may
reﬂect the incorporation of overnight information in stock returns, while the high variability
of the ﬁrst half-hour returns may reﬂect the discrepancy in understanding this overnight
information. The low variability in the last half-hour returns indicates less disagreement on
the pricing of stocks.  This is consistent with the hypothesis that traders who trade in the
morning are more informative and have stronger information processing power while those
who trade in the last half hour are followers who have less access to the information and are



    7Forinstance, NewYorkStockExchangeoperatescontinuouslyfrom09:30to16:00whereasTokyoStock

Exchange trades from 09:00 to 15:00 with one hour lunch break from 11:30 to 12:30.


                                                        8
less informative as a result (Barclay and Hendershott(2003) andGao et al.(2018)). Most of
the returns have a slightly negative skewness with a kurtosis around 3, indicating that these
intraday returns are not as non-normal as found with daily returns.


3. Intraday Return Predictability Around the World

3.1.  Estimating the relation between ﬁrst and last half-hour returns

    We start our analysis by investigating the in–sample predictability of the ﬁrst half hour
on the last half-hour return in the 16 individual equity market indices respectively.  To do
so, we followGao et al.(2018) and run the following predictive regression for each market :

                                   rLt  =α+βFrFt  +ϵt, t = 1,···,T,                                       (2)

whererLt  andrFt  stand for the last and the ﬁrst half-hour returns at timet, respectively and
T is the total number of trading days in the sample.
    Table3tabulates the in–sample estimation results of the predictive regression shown in
Equation (2) for each equity market, over the full sample period (Panel A) and over a set of
diﬀerent periods such as the ﬁnancial crisis (Panel B), non-crisis period (Panel C), recession
(Panel D), and expansion (Panel E).8 The last row in Panels A, B and C of Table3shows
the results from a pooled regression where we run a panel model with country dummies,
clustering the standard errors by country.  This model allows for the observations of same
country at diﬀerent time points to be correlated, and to control for the heteroskedastisity
and autocorrelation We also adjust the standard errors using theNewey and West(1987)
correction modiﬁed for a panel framework.
    Over the 2005–2017 period (Panel A) our empirical evidence suggests that 12 out of 16
countriesexhibitastatisticallysigniﬁcantin–samplepredictabilityoftheﬁrsthalfhouronthe



    8We followGao et al.(2018) and set the ﬁnancial crisis period from 2                 nd  Dec 2007 to 30th  June

2009 while the OECD recession and expansion indicators are sourced from FRED St.   Louis:   https:
//fred.stlouisfed.org/.  Note that the methodology for computing OECD expansion/recession indica-
tors diﬀerentiates from the methodology by NBER eﬀective from January 2009. Full-sample analysis results
based on local currency are reported in TableB.1ofAppendix  B.



                                                         9
lasthalf-hourreturn.9 Amongthem, ninemarketshavestatisticallysigniﬁcantpositiveslope
coeﬃcientsatthe1%level. Whenall16marketsarepooledweﬁndapositiveandstatistically
signiﬁcantrelationbetweentheﬁrstandthelasthalf-hourreturns. Thecoeﬃcientoftheﬁrst
half-hour return is 2.86 and statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero (t-statistic 7.53).
    Collectively,weprovidestrongevidencethattheﬁrsthalf-hourreturnpositivelyforecasts
the last half-hour return. This relationship is pervasive across countries and it is consistent
with the evidence found in the US stock market (Gao et al.(2018)).

                                           [Table 3 about here.]

3.2.  Intraday time-series momentum under various conditions

    Wenowinvestigatetherelationbetweentheﬁrstandlasthalf-hourreturnsundervarious
market conditions, i.e. during the ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial crisis periods and the business
cycle. PanelsBandCofTable3showthatthepredictabilityoftheﬁrsthalfhouronthelast
half-hour return is economically stronger during the ﬁnancial crisis compared to the non–
crisisperiod;12outof16marketsexhibitlargerslopecoeﬃcientsduringﬁnancialcrisis,while
the magnitude of adjustedR2s is much larger compared to the one in the non-crisis period.
Amongst the 16 markets, the predictive power of the ﬁrst half hour is more pronounced in
the US stock market which has a (scaled) coeﬃcient of the ﬁrst half hour equal to 18.28
during the ﬁnancial crisis, four times larger than the corresponding one observed when we
exclude the ﬁnancial crisis period from our full sample period (the coeﬃcient is equal to
4.28). In the pooled regression we ﬁnd a stronger positive relation between the ﬁrst and the
last half-hour returns during the ﬁnancial crisis period relative to the non-crisis period; the
coeﬃcients of the ﬁrst half-hour returns are 3.71 and 2.09, for the ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
crisis periods, respectively. Note that both coeﬃcients are statistically distinguishable from
zero. Similarly, the adjustedR2 is equal to 1.18% during ﬁnancial crisis; this is almost two



    9Gao et al.(2018) document an     R2 equal to 1.6% and argue that the level is considered impressive and

relatively large compared to other predictors, especially at this data frequency.  In our empirical analysis,
4 out 12 equity markets exhibit an adjustedR2 above 1.6%. The large proportion of the markets showing
strong positive signiﬁcance is rather striking and may imply intraday time-series momentum exists not only
on the US market but across the world.

                                                       10
times larger than the one observed in the non-crisis period (i.e.  0.63%).  Panels D and E
show that the predictive ability of the ﬁrst half hour on the last half-hour return is stronger
during recessions compared to expansions, with an average slope and adjustedR2 equal to
4.05 (2.52) and 1.72% (0.81%) for the recession (expansion) periods.10  The ITSM exhibits
larger slope coeﬃcients in 12 out of 16 markets during recession compared to expansion
periods.
    Collectively, Table3provides strong evidence that the positive relation between the ﬁrst
half hour and the last half-hour return is more pronounced during the ﬁnancial crisis and
recession periods. Our ﬁndings extend the evidence shown inGao et al.(2018) for the US
stock market to a comprehensive set of countries around the world.

3.3.  Out–of–sample predictability

    Up to this point, we have examined the in-sample predictability of the ﬁrst on the last
half-hour return, which was based on the entire sample period. In this section, we formally
examine the out-of-sample (OOS) predictive power of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the last
half-hour return for each individual stock market index.  This enables us to assess the pa-
rameter instability over time in the predictive regressions (Ashley et al.(1980) andWelch
and Goyal(2008)).
    Based on an expanding window approach, we use the ﬁrst ﬁve years (2005-2010) of our
sample as the initial estimation period and recursively regress Equation2on each market by
adding one day at a time. Then we evaluate the OOS performance of our predictive model
by comparing it with that of a simple historical mean model via four statistics.11
    The ﬁrst statistic is theCampbell and Thompson(2008) out-of-sample             R2 calculated as



   10Note that since the recession and expansion periods are country-speciﬁc, we restrict our empirical

analysis to individual predictive regressions and do not run a pooled regression.
   11Goyal and Welch(2003) andWelch and Goyal(2008) show it is diﬃcult for a predictive model to

outperform the historical mean model in an out-of-sample setting.








                                                        11
follows:12                                               ∑T
                                        R2OOS = 1−       ∑Tt=1(rLt−ˆrLt )2

                                                            t=1(rLt−¯rLt )2,                                            (3)
whereT is the number of observations in the out-of-sample period,rLt  is the realized value
of the last half-hour return at timet, ¯rLt  is the value estimated by using historical mean
of the last half-hour return with data until timet−1, and ˆrLt  is the estimated value from
the predictive regression using information available up to timet−1.  A positive value of
theR2OOS implies that the predictive model (equation2) outperforms the historical mean
model.13
    WhiletheR2OOS iscommonlyusedintheliterature(FerreiraandSanta-Clara(2011),Gao
et al.(2018),Neely et al.(2014), andRapach et al.(2010)),Campbell and Thompson(2008)
arguethatperverseestimatesintherecursiveregressionscanbeeasilygeneratedduetoshort
estimation period and thus add no value in practice. In our case, a negative slope estimation
would not help someone make an out-of-sample investment decision if they believe that the
theoretical relation between the ﬁrst and the last half-hour returns is positive. In addition,
one would not follow the trading signal generated by the predictive regression if the forecast
returninthelasthalfhournextdayisnegative. ToexaminetheOOSpredictabilityinamore
realistic setting, we followCampbell and Thompson(2008) and compute the constrained            R2
as our second statistic, denoted asRst.R2OOS. TheRst.R2OOS imposes two restrictions on the
R2OOS.  In particular, we ﬁrst set the slope coeﬃcient to zero whenever its estimated value
is negative, then set ˆrLt  to zero if it is negative. Similar to its unconstrained counterpart, a
positive value ofRst.R2OOS indicates superior OOS performance of the predictive model over



   12This statistic essentially compares the Mean Squared Prediction Error (MSPE) of our predictive model

with that of the historical mean model.Welch and Goyal(2008) employ a similar statistic with adjustment
for degree-of-freedom.  Since we have only one predictor and a relatively large sample size with high data
frequency, the eﬀect of degree-of-freedom adjustment would be trivial.
   13In a ﬁnite sample and under the null that the predictor does not help prediction,Clark and West

(2006) state that the predictive model should have larger MSPE due to the noise caused by estimating
extra parameters, resulting in a negativeR2OOS. In contrast, a positiveR2OOS implies smaller MSPE of the
predictive model compared to that of the historical mean model, thus indicating out-of-sample predictability
of the predictor.



                                                         12
that of the historical mean model.
    We then test the null hypothesis that the MSPE of the historical mean model is equal or
less than that of the predictive model (equivalent toH0:R2OOS≤ 0 againstH1:R2OOS> 0).
In order to do so, we use theClark and West(2007)        MSPE−adjusted.14 To calculate the
statistic, we ﬁrst compute a time series of  ˆft as follows:

                                ˆft = (rLt−¯rLt )2−[(rLt−ˆrLt )2−(¯rLt−ˆrLt )2],                                 (4)


and then regress  ˆft against a constant.  TheClark and West(2007)        MSPE−adjusted is
the one-sided (upper-tail) student-t statistic of the constant term. We also apply theNewey
and West(1987) corrections to this      t-statistic.
    Furthermore, we investigate whether the historical mean model forecasts encompass the
predictivemodelforecasts. Thisgivesusasenseofwhetherthelatterprovidesusefulinforma-
tion in prediction relative to the former.15 To this end, we conduct an forecast encompassing
test that is valid for nested models, usingENCNEW  proposed byClark and McCracken
(2001).           16 The null hypothesis is that the forecasts of the historical mean model encompass
those of the predictive model; the one-sided (upper-tail) alternative hypothesis is that the
forecasts of the historical mean model do not encompass those of the predictive model:
                                           ∑T
                         ENCNEW =             t=1[(rLt−¯rLt )2−(rLt−ˆrLt )(rLt−¯rLt )]
                                                       T−1∑Tt=1(rLt−ˆrLt )2      .                          (5)

    Table4tabulates the four OOS statistics along with the average recursive regression
coeﬃcients for each country. As shown in the table, the average slope coeﬃcient is positive



   14TheMSPE−adjusted is an adjusted version of theDiebold and Mariano(2002) andWest(1996)

statistic that is used to test the MSPE hypothesis in a non-nested setting.Clark and McCracken(2001)
andMcCracken(2007) point out that theDiebold and Mariano(2002) andWest(1996) statistic has a
nonstandard distribution when used for nested models, like in our case.Clark and West(2007) show the
MSPE−adjusted has an approximately standard normal asymptotic distribution when used for comparing
nested models, leading to valid inferences.
   15For a textbook discussion of forecast encompassing, seeClements and Hendry(1998).

   16ThisstatisticisalsoemployedbyBarrosoandMaio(2019)andRapachandWohar(2006)amongothers.

Since its asymptotic distribution is nonstandard, we use the critical values given byClark and McCracken
(2001). That is, we use 1.280 and 2.085 for 5% and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively.


                                                          13
for all countries.  Five out of 16 countries exhibit positiveR2OOS, while 10 show positive
Rst.R2OOS.17  Although only ﬁve markets give positiveR2OOS, theClark and West(2007)
MSPE−adjustedrejectsthenull(R2OOS≤ 0)in10markets. Thisinterestingresultsuggests
that a negativeR2OOS (or/andRst.R2OOS) does not necessarily imply complete denial of the
OOS predictability of the ﬁrst half-hour return.  If we take the example of the Japanese
market, bothR2OOS andRst.R2OOS are shown negative, yet this gives a signiﬁcantMSPE−
adjusted at the 1% conﬁdence level, indicating that the MSPEs for the predictive model are
signiﬁcantly less than that of the historical mean model in this market.18  The last column
of Table4reports results of the forecast encompassing test.  The null (the historical mean
forecasts encompass the predictive forecasts) is rejected in 14 out of 16 countries, implying
that the ﬁrst half-hour return does provide additional predictive information relative to a
simple historical mean of the last half-hour return in thoes markets.   Overall, our OOS
analysis furnishes strong evidence of OOS predictability of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the
last hour-hour return in most countries.

                                              [Table 4 about here.]

3.4.  Economic signiﬁcance

    The statistical performance demonstrated in the previous subsection does not necessarily
translate into economic beneﬁts from an investment perspective.19 Kandel and Stambaugh
(1996) show that variables with relatively weak statistical predictive power can still produce



   17Most estimated slope coeﬃcients steadily remained positive in the recursive regressions, making the

eﬀect of the sign restriction trivial. It is the forecast restriction that contributes most to the improvement
in theRst.R2OOS performance.
   18In a study of technical indicator predictability,Neely et al.(2014) ﬁnd similar results and argue, in

Footnote 21, that this is plausible when comparing nested models.  For further discussions, seeClark and
West(2007) andMcCracken(2007).
   19Cenesizoglu and Timmermann(2012) compare the economic and statistical performance of 60 return

prediction models and ﬁnd weak evidence of a close relationship between economic and statistical perfor-
mances. They argue that this is due to the fact that statistical measures generally focus on the accuracy of
mean prediction whereas the focal point of economic measures is whether the model can predict movements
of the whole return distribution associated with the weights given by the utility function.


                                                          14
signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts in a portfolio context. We now examine the economic value of
the ITSM in each of the 16 stock markets and compare the proﬁtability of the country ITSM
strategy with two passive country strategies – namely the Always-long and Buy-and-hold –
as inGao et al.(2018).
    For the ITSM strategy we consider the sign of the ﬁrst half-hour return as the trad-
ing/timing signal – i.e. if the ﬁrst half-hour yields a positive return, we take a long position
in the last half-hour on the same day; if the ﬁrst half-hour yields a negative return, we take a
short position in the last half-hour on the same day. We close all the positions at the market
close everyday. The market timing strategy can be summarized as follows:
                                                 
                                         rI,t =     rLt,      ifrFt > 0;                                       (6)
                                                 −rLt,   ifrFt≤ 0,


whererI,t is the market timing return of ITSM on dayt and,rFt  andrLt  are the ﬁrst and last
half-hour return at time t, respectively.
    The Always-long strategy takes an always-long position at the beginning of the last half-
hour and a closing position at the market close.  The Buy-and-hold strategy is a passive
strategy which takes a long position of the equity index at the beginning of the sample
period, and holds the index until the end of the period.

                                            [Table 5 about here.]

    Table5tabulates the mean, standard deviation (SD), skewness, kurtosis and the Sharpe
ratio of the intraday time-series momentum (i.e. ITSM) and the two benchmark strategies,
Always-long and Buy-and-hold, for each of the 16 equity markets as well as the correlation
(ρ) between the ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns.20 The alpha (α) and Appraisal
Ratio (ARatio) are based on the following regression:

                                        rI,t =α+βrbenchmark,t+ϵt,                                             (7)



   20We conduct the same analysis using data based on local currencies and report the results in TableB.2

ofAppendix  B.



                                                        15
whererI,t andrbenchmark,t stand for the returns from ITSM and benchmark strategies, re-
spectively.  The appraisal ratio is calculated asα/σϵ whereσϵ is the standard error of the
regression. Standard errors are adjusted using theNewey and West(1987) correction. We
test the hypothesis that the Sharpe ratios of the ITSM and the Always-long or Buy-and-
hold strategies are equal following the HAC inference method proposed byLedoit and Wolf
(2008).           21
    Table5shows that ITSM exhibits positive return over the 2005-2017 period across mar-
kets.  The volatility of the ITSM strategy is lower compared to the Always-long and Buy-
and-hold strategies in seven and 16 out of 16 markets, respectively.  ITSM has a positive
skewness in 10 out of 16 markets suggesting low crash risk while the ITSM and the passive
strategies appear to be unrelated (i.e.  the correlation between ITSM and the benchmark
strategy returns is close to 0).  Finally, the ITSM strategy possesses higher Sharpe ratios
compared to Always-long and Buy-and-hold strategies in eight and 14 out of 16 markets,
respectively, albeit not statistically signiﬁcant in all cases.  ITSM has positive statistically
signiﬁcant (at the 1% level in most cases) alphas in 10 out of 16 countries, ranging be-
tween 2.66% (for the UK) and 7.45% (for Norway) per annum when regressed against the
Always-long strategy, and between 2.60% (for the UK) and 7.28% (for Norway) per annum
when regressed against Buy-and-hold strategy. Similarly, among countries giving signiﬁcant
alphas, the annualized appraisal ratios range between 0.52 (for UK) and 0.99 (for Norway)
when regressed against the Always-long strategy and between 0.51 (for the UK) and 0.97
(for Norway) when regressed against the Buy-and-hold strategy.


4. Cross-country Relationship of Intraday Time-series Momentum

4.1.  Global and regional commonality

    Given the pervasiveness of ITSM portfolio proﬁtability shown in the previous sections,
the question that arises is whether these portfolios are global, regional, or country-speciﬁc.
Iftheseportfoliosaremainlydrivenbycommonglobalfactors, therewouldnotbeanydiﬀer-



  21The R code used in this study is available on Wolf’s website: \https://www.econ.uzh.ch/en/people/

faculty/wolf/publications.html#9.


                                                      16
enceforaUSinvestortoinvestintheUSITSMstrategyorinaglobalstrategythatcombines
the country ITSM portfolios. Accordingly, a global ITSM momentum diversiﬁcation strat-
egy should also perform similarly to a local ITSM strategy, which involves an investment
in the individual country ITSM strategies. In contrast, if the local ITSM portfolios contain
sizable country-speciﬁc or regional components, these country ITSM strategies would allow
the investor to expand their investment opportunity set signiﬁcantly beyond what can be
achieved by the country ITSM portfolios alone. Using the methodology inBrockman et al.
(2009) and the principal component analysis (PCA), we address this question both globally
and regionally.
    We compute the correlation coeﬃcients between country momentum portfolios. Table6
shows that the correlation coeﬃcients between most countries are close to zero.  However,
we observe larger correlations between countries that are geographically closer, compared to
the coeﬃcients between countries across regions. For example, the coeﬃcients between the
UK and most European countries are signiﬁcantly larger than those between the UK and
other countries.  We discuss in more detail this regional relationship in ITSM later in this
subsection.

                                          [Table 6 about here.]

    To investigate the commonality in ITSM, we ﬁrst test for potential common variation
across the country individual ITSM portfolios.   We follow the methodology adopted by
Chordia et al.(2000) andBrockman et al.(2009) in their studies on commonality in market
liquidity, and run the following time series regression:

                        rI,i,t =αi+βtrI,g,t+βt+1rI,g,t+1+βt−1rI,g,t−1+ϵi,t,                           (8)

whererI,i,t is the ITSM return in countryi at timet,rI,g,t is the contemporaneous equally-
weightedITSMreturnbasedonthecountryITSMsexcludingcountryi,rI,g,t+1istheequally-
weightedITSMreturnbasedonthecountryITSMsexcludingcountryiatt+1,andrI,g,t−1 is
theequally-weightedITSMreturnbasedonthecountryITSMsexcludingcountryiatt−1.22
The inclusion of the control variablesrI,g,t+1 andrI,g,t−1 eliminates the lag eﬀect induced



  22Both studies ofChordia et al.(2000) andBrockman et al.(2009) employ the percentage change of the

                                                     17
by the time diﬀerence issue.  A positive and signiﬁcant contemporaneous slope coeﬃcient
βt indicates inﬂuence of the globe-level ITSM returns onrI,i,t, while the magnitude of the
adjustedR2 of Equation (8) measures the strength of such inﬂuence.
    PanelAofTable7showsthatthecountryITSMsareinﬂuencedbytheglobe-levelITSM.
Theβts are statistically signiﬁcant in 12 out of 16 markets and the average coeﬃcient has a
magnitude of 73.79 (scaled by 100) (see the last row of Table7). However, the adjusted    R2s
show the strength of such inﬂuence varies from country to country. Apart from Switzerland,
the adjustedR2s for most European countries are relatively large ranging from 12.39%
(Austria) to 52% (France), whereas that of the rest countries are fairly low ranging from
0.43% (US market) to 2.62% (Austria). The signiﬁcant contemporaneous slope coeﬃcients
together with the disagreement in the adjustedR2s imply that only part of the expected
return in each country intraday momentum is captured by a common global component and
stronger regional commonality may exist, consistent with the previous correlation analysis.

                                            [Table 7 about here.]

    Asness et al.(2013) employ the principal component analysis (PCA) to the returns of
value and momentum portfolios across asset classes and ﬁnd a global commonality in value
and momentum strategies.  We carry out a PCA in the individual ITSM market timing
return series, which are normalized and standardized to eliminate the eﬀect of idiosyncratic
characteristics in each market. Panel A of Figure1depicts the variance explained by each
component. The ﬁrst principal component (PC1) accounts only for 27.7% of the covariance
matrix of the ITSM returns.23 Panels B to D in Figure1plot the front view, top view, and


liquidity measures to study the co-movement of liquidity and to avoid econometric issues, e.g., nonstationar-
ity. In our case, we are interested more in commonality in the ITSM across countries than the co-movement
of the returns. In addition, as we are analyzing strategy returns, it is less likely to encounter the potential
econometric issues faced in their studies.
   23Oneconcernwithourapproachisthe16marketsarenon-synchronized,i.e. theyhavediﬀerentoperating

periods, leading to possible underestimation of commonality.  In order to account for this issue, we repeat
our principal component analysis with monthly aggregated ITSM returns and the conclusion remains largely
unchanged. Results can be found inAppendix  C. In the following regional commonality analysis, we also
group countries based on the geographical location, further alleviate the non-synchronized issue.

                                                        18
end view of the rotated data plotted in a 3-D space of which the axes are the ﬁrst, second,
and third principal components (PC1, PC2, and PC3), respectively.  These plots visualize
the relation between the variance of returns of ITSM in each market and the ﬁrst three PCs.
Speciﬁcally, we plot the rotated data using the scores on PC1, PC2, and PC3. Then we use
arrowstoindicate therelationshipbetweenthe varianceof ITSMreturnsin each market and
thePCs. Thearrowsareobtainedbyprojectingthereturndataintotheprincipalcomponent
space.24 ThelengthandangleofthearrowsshowhowheavilyandspeedilytheITSMreturns
in each market respond each of the ﬁrst three principal components. The ITSM returns are
concentrated in mainly three directions that are roughly orthogonal.  Firstly, all European
markets, apart from Switzerland, point to the same direction as does the PC1.  Secondly,
Switzerland, the two Scandinavian countries, and all Paciﬁc countries in the sample point
roughly to the same direction that is perpendicular to the PC1.  Finally, the two North
American countries point to a direction that is roughly perpendicular to the ﬁrst two PCs.
Again, consistent with both the correlation analysis and the commonality regressions shown
above,weﬁndweakevidenceofglobalcommonalitybutseeminglystrongevidenceofregional
commonality.

                                         [Figure 1 about here.]

    We further conﬁrm regional commonality in ITSM by applying PCA analysis to three
geographicalsub-samples,namely,Americancountries,Asia-Paciﬁccountries,andEuropean
countries. Figure2plots the ﬁrst principal components obtained from each group. Splitting
thesamplegeographicallyleadstoPC1sthatexplainarelativelylargeproportionofvariance
ineachregion. TheﬁrstprincipalcomponentfromtheAmericancountriesexplains63.1%of
the ITSM return variance while that from the Asia-Paciﬁc and European countries explains
41.5% and 40.3% respectively.

                                         [Figure 2 about here.]



  24The rotated data are obtain by multiplying return data matrix and the component loading matrix

(rotation matrix).



                                                    19
    Our empirical evidence suggests that the country ITSM strategies share a universal risk
factor. However, thisfactorexplainsonlypartoftheirvariationwhereascountriesgeograph-
ically close exhibit stronger regional risk factors, suggesting potential diversiﬁcation beneﬁts
from investing in a combined portfolio of country ITSM strategies globally.

4.2.  What is the role of US?

    It is known that US market may possess cross-market predictability on returns of inter-
national markets. At monthly frequency,Campbell and Hamao(1992) present evidence that
the US macroeconomic variables such as the dividend-price ratio and the short interest rate
canhelppredictJapanesestockreturns.Rapachetal.(2013)showthattheUSstockreturns
Granger cause stock returns in 11international markets. At a higher frequency,Becker et al.
(1990) state the daily open-to-close US stock return can predict that of the Japanese stock
market on the next day.
    It is therefore natural to investigate the predictive role of US ﬁrst half-hour returns in
a cross-market setting. In particular, we regress the local last half-hour return of a country
(apartfromUS)againsttheimmediatelypreviousUSﬁrsthalf-hourreturnavailableandthe
local ﬁrst half-hour return as a control variable of local ITSM. That is, for non-Asia-Paciﬁc
countries, we ﬁt the following model:

                                rLlocal,t =α+βUSrFUS,t+βlocalrFlocal,t+ϵt                                    (9)

WhererFlocal,t is the ﬁrst half-hour return of the local country on dayt,rFUS,t is the ﬁrst
half-hour return from the US market on dayt, andrLlocal,t is the last half-hour return of the
local country on dayt. For Australia, Japan, and New Zealand, whose markets close before
the US market open on the same calendar day, we use the US ﬁrst half-hour return from the
previous day:
                               rLlocal,t =α+βUSrFUS,t−1+βlocalrFlocal,t+ϵt                                 (10)

SigniﬁcantβUS of Equation (9) and Equation (10) imply predictability of the US ﬁrst half-
hour return on the local last half-hour return.
    Panel B of Table7reports the results.  The US ﬁrst half-hour return is found to be
associated with a positive slope coeﬃcient in 12 out of 15 international countries, while 8 of

                                                       20
the coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant. In the last column, we report the increase in the adjustedR2
by including the US ﬁrst half-hour return as an additional predictive variable, which is the
diﬀerence between the adjustedR2 of Model (9) or (10) and that of Model (2):

                                      ∆Adj.R2 =Adj.R2cross−Adj.R2local                                        (11)

WhereAdj.R2local is the adjustedR2 of Model (2), and Adj.R2cross is the adjustedR2 of Model
(9) or (10), depending on the local country.
    Using wild bootstrapped data, we also test the null hypothesis of no US ﬁrst half-hour
return predictability (H0 :βUS = 0 vsH1 :βUS> 0 orβUS< 0).  In particular, we take
Equation (9) and Equation (10) as benchmark predictive regressions and, given the research
on intraday return persistence (Heston et al.(2010) andLou et al.(2019)), we assume that
the US ﬁrst half-hour return follows a ﬁrst order autoregressive process:

                                            rFUS,t =δ+θrFUS,t−1+vt                                              (12)

wherevt is a white noise. We therefore simulate alternative data under the null hypothesis:


                                       ∗rLlocal,t = ˆα+ ˆβlocalrFlocal,t+ˆϵtwt                                         (13)


                                         ∗rFUS,t = ˆδ+ ˆθ∗rFUS,t−1+ˆvtwt                                           (14)


where ˆα, ˆβlocal,andˆϵt areestimatedfromthebenchmarkequations; ˆδ, ˆθ,and ˆvt areestimated
from Equation (12);  wt is randomly generated from the standard normal distribution;∗rFUS,0
is set to be equal torFUS,0.  We multiply both residual terms with the same random scalar
to preserve the contemporaneous correlation between the local ﬁrst half-hour return and the
US ﬁrst-half hour return and to maintain the conditional heteroskedastisity structure in the
error terms (Rapach et al.(2013)).
    We then collect theNewey and West(1987) t-statistic of        βUS from the benchmark equa-
tions (either one of them depending on the local country) with the bootstrapped data:


                                 ∗rLlocal,t =α+βUS∗rFUS,t+βlocalrFlocal,t+ϵt                                 (15)


                               ∗rLlocal,t =α+βUS∗rFUS,t−1+βlocalrFlocal,t+ϵt                                (16)




                                                          21
    Repeating the above process 2000 times leads to 2000 t-statistics, from which the p-value
is computed as the proportion of the bootstrapped t-statistics that have a larger absolute
value than the t-statistic obtained from the benchmark equations.
    As shown in Panel B of Table7, we reject the null of no US cross-market predictability
at 10% level in 10 out of 16 markets, implying a strong leading role of the US market at
intraday frequency.


5. Investing In Intraday Time-series Momentum Globally

5.1.  Beneﬁts from diversiﬁcation

    To exploit the potential diversiﬁcation beneﬁts in ITSM discussed in the previous sub-
section, we study three types of global intraday time-series momentum strategies (GITSM).
We consider a (1) GITSM based on individual ITSM, (2) GITSM based on regional ITSM,
(3) GITSM using the signal from US ﬁrst half hour return.  For each type of GITSM, we
employ six portfolio construction techniques using equal, value, inverse-variance (Kirby and
Ostdiek(2012)), maximum-diversiﬁcation (Choueifaty and Coignard(2008)), mean-variance
and minimum-variance weights.
    For Type (1) GITSM, we ﬁrst obtain individual ITSM return series by simply go long
in the last half hour of a country equity index if the ﬁrst half-hour return on that index is
positive and go short if negative. Then, we calculate the realized GITSM returns based on
the above mentioned techniques.25



   25Although our sample consists of major stock indices across the globe and each stock market opens

at diﬀerent time, we do not suﬀer from the time diﬀerence issue when constructing the global portfolios.
Geographically, the market that opens the earliest in our sample is the New Zealand market (GMT+12)
while the US market is the latest (GMT-4).  The time diﬀerence between Wellington and New York is 16
hours; that is, when the US market closes at New York time 4pm, the local time for the New Zealand market
is 8am next day, which is two hours prior to the New Zealand market open. In practice, at the US market
close on dayt, a fund manager will have the last half-hour return for all the countries in sample on day t and
be able to make decisions on the weights for dayt+1. At this time, the local time for the earliest-opened
market, New Zealand market, is 8am on dayt+1, which is several hours prior to its last half hour on day
t+1. Therefore, a daily global portfolio is realistic in practice without suﬀering from time diﬀerence issues.



                                                         22
    ForType(2)GITSM,thebaseassetsareregionalITSMinsteadofindividualITSM.That
is, we average ITSM returns across American countries, Asia-Paciﬁc countries, and Europe
countries to get three regional ITSM return series before we construct GITSM portfolios
accordingly.
    For Type (3) GITSM, the base return series are generated by trading in the last half
hour of each market guided by the signal from the US ﬁrst-half return. If the US ﬁrst-hour
return is positive (rFUS> 0) on dayt, we go long in the last half hour on each market and
vice versa ifrFUS< 0.
    We use the ﬁrst ﬁve years in the sample as the initial estimation period for the construc-
tion of the inverse-variance, maximum-diversiﬁcation, mean-variance and minimum-variance
portfolios. More speciﬁcally, we compute the weights based on information from the period
4th October 2005 to 1st October 2010, and invest from 4th October 2010 until the end of
the sample period.26  We compute the weights recursively by adding one day a time in the
light of estimation stability of such expanding window approach.27  Finally, we impose the
constraints that assure the sum of weights is equally to one and short sales are not allowed.
    Table8evaluates the three types of GITSM. Panel A reports the mean, standard devia-
tion (SD), skewness, kurtosis, and Sharpe ratio of the global intraday time-series momentum
under the diﬀerent weighting schemes for each type.  Panel B tabulates the alphas from
the spanning regressions of global intraday momentum on country (individual) intraday
momentum, while Panel C presents the alphas from the spanning regressions of country
(individual) intraday momentum portfolios on global intraday momentum;Newey and West
(1987) t-statistics are shown in parenthesis.
    Over the 2005-2017 period, the annualized returns of the value-weighted GITSM (VW-
GITSM)aregenerallyhigherthanthatoftheequally-weightedGITSM(EW-GITSM)(4.75%
vs3.06%, 2.71%vs2.78%, and5.71%vs5.17%). However, theVW-GITSMalsohasahigher
volatility (3.22%, 2.41%, and 3.51%) for all types of GITSM compared to the volatility of
the EW-GITSM (2.43%, 2.01% and 2.93%).  The Sharpe ratio of the EW-GITSM is lower



  261st October 2010 is a Friday and 4th October is the following Monday.

  27Indeed, we also present results based on a rolling window approach in TableB.3ofAppendix  B, the

results do not change radically.

                                                     23
than that of the VW-GITSM for Type (1) GTISM while higher for both Type (2) and (3).
   The spanning alphas of the EW- and VW-GITSM on the country individual ITSM are
considerably large and positive and are statistically signiﬁcant at 1% level in all cases but
for Type (2) VW-GITSM against US-ITSM. The signiﬁcant alphas range from 1.40% to
4.76% and 1.58% to 5.58% per annum for the EW- and VW-GITSM, respectively (Panel
B). In the reverse regression on the country ITSM portfolios on the global EW and VW
intraday momentum, we document no statistically signiﬁcant alphas or even negative and
statistically signiﬁcant alphas for most countries with Norway being the only country that
consistently gives positive and signiﬁcant alphas.  Our evidence suggests that the global
portfolios subsume the individual country ITSM portfolios.
   TheremainingGITSMportfoliosperforminconsistentlyacrossthethreetypesofGITSM.
Theinverse-varianceGITSM(IV-GITSM)yeildsloweraveragereturnsthantheEW-GITSM
and VW-GITSM do, yet gives positive and signiﬁcant spanning alphas when against all in-
dividual ITSM for Type (2) and most of ITSM for Type (3). The maximum-diversiﬁcation
GITSM (MD-GITSM) gives larger returns than does the IV-GITSM in Type (1) and (3)
GITSM, and exhibits positive and signiﬁcant spanning alphas in when against most indi-
vidual ITSM. Despite of the relatively weak economic signiﬁcance of mean-variance GITSM
(MV-GITSM) in Type (1) and (2) GITSM, the MV-GITSM of Type (3) GITSM manifests
itself as the strongest strategy in our evaluation, with an annualized return of 6.75% and
remarkable spanning alphas ranging from 5.63% to 7.19%.
   Finally, the minimum-variance GITSM (MinV-GITSM) exhibits signiﬁcant spanning al-
phas in only Type (2) GITSM. We also document that the GITSM portfolios exhibit higher
Sharpe Ratios compared to country individual ones. Over the 2005-2017 period the annual-
ized Sharpe ratios of the EW-GITSM are 1.26, 1.38, and 1.77 for all types and that of the
VW-GITSM are 1.48, 1.12 and 1.63.  In contrast, the Sharpe ratios of the country ITSM
range between -0.40 and 1.12 over the same period.
   Overall, our analysis shows investing ITSM globally produces signiﬁcant economic gain
and the global intraday momentum subsumes the country intraday momentum, but not the
opposite.

                                         [Table 8 about here.]

                                                   24
5.2.  Factor exposure of GITSM and the source of its proﬁtability

    Taking the equally-weighted GITSM of Type (1) as an example, we further study the
factor exposure of GITSM.28 In particular, we deﬁne the global intraday momentum return
as the equally-weighted 16 country ITSM portfolio return in excess of the 1-month T-bill
rate, and regress it against the global market factor (CAPM), global Fama-French 3-factor
model(FF3),globalFama-French3-factormodelplusthe(cross-sectional)momentumfactor
(FF3+MOM), global Fama-French 5-factor model (FF5), and global Fama-French 5-factor
model plus the momentum factor (FF5+MOM).29
    Panel A of Table9tabulates the results from these regressions.  The results show that
the loadings of the GITSM on the global equity factors are insigniﬁcant, while we docu-
ment statistically signiﬁcant and positive alphas varying between 2.90% (FF3) and 2.97%
(FF5) across the models, highlighting that the proﬁtability of the global intraday time-series
momentum strategy is not captured by global equity factors.

                                           [Table 9 about here.]

    So where does the proﬁtability of GTISM come from?Goyal and Jegadeesh(2018) com-
pare the performance of time-series momentum (Moskowitz et al.(2012)) and cross-sectional
momentum (Jegadeesh and Titman(1993)), and conclude that the out-performance of the
time-series momentum is largely due to a time-varying factor that is implicitly incorporated
into the strategy. More speciﬁcally, they claim that the dollar value invested in the long leg
and the short leg in the time-series momentum is not identical and varies over time, while
cross-sectional momentum is a purely zero-cost strategy. This emanates from the fact that
the time-series momentum holds long position in assets with buy signal and short position
in assets with sell signal, while the number of assets with buy and sell signals varies over
time.



   28From now, we use words ‘Type (1) EW-GITSM’ and ‘GITSM’ interchangeably.

   29The global factors are sourced from French Library, i.e.   http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/

faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. The global factors are constructed from developed markets and
represent the global stock market.



                                                      25
    While our GITSM based on the intraday time-series momentum introduced byGao et al.
(2018) diﬀers from the time-series momentum byMoskowitz et al.(2012), it does possess
similarconstructionfeatures. Forinstance,supposeonagivendaytthat10ofthe16country
equity indices in our sample generate positive trading signals and the remaining six generate
negative trading signals.  In this case, the wealth we invest on dayt in the long leg is by
construction higher than that in the short leg.  The reason is we are equally weighting all
the 16 indices across the long and short legs rather than weighting within the long and short
portfolios separately. As a result, our global intraday time-series momentum incorporates a
time-varying net position, which is the diﬀerence in the wealth invested in each leg.30
    Therefore, we examine the contribution of this time-varying factor to the proﬁtability of
GITSM.TodosoweﬁrstcomputethisfactorfollowingtheapproachinGoyalandJegadeesh
(2018). To be speciﬁc, we invest, in total, two dollar value into the GITSM and invest the
net position into the global market.  Considering the previous example where we had 10
indices exhibiting positive signal and six indices exhibiting negative signal, the dollar value
we invest in the long leg in this case is  1016×$2 = $1.25, and the dollar value we invest in the
short leg is  616×$2 = $0.75, hence we end up with a net long position of $1.25−$0.75 = $0.5
in the countries that possess positive trading signals. Because the unconditional probability
of an asset return being positive/negative is 0.5, the net position between the long and short
legs on average invests on the whole market, which is the equally-weighted ITSM across the
16 indices employed in our study.  Therefore, the time-varying global factor is deﬁned as
follows:
                                        TVCt =EWMt×NPMt,                                            (17)

whereEWMt is the equally-weighted last half-hour return across the 16 country indices –
i.e. EWMt =   116×∑16i=1rLi,t, whererLi,t stands for the last half hour of countryi at time
t, andNPMt denotes the net position in the global market at time t – i.e. NPMt  =
(Nlongt −Nshortt     )×2.Nlongt     (Nshortt     ) is the number of indices in the long (short) leg.  It is
worth noting that whileEWMt andNPMt are on the same day, our construction ofTVCt



   30Technically, this time-varying net position can be either net long or net short depending on the number

of stock indices in the long and short legs.


                                                       26
is ex-ante.  This is becauseNPMt is computed from the ﬁrst half hour of dayt whereas
EWMt is the equally-weighted global market in the last half hour of dayt.
    Next, we regressGITSM×2 against Fama-French factors with TVC included on the
right hand side as follows:

                               GITSMt×2 =α+β′Ft+TVCt+ϵt,                                  (18)

whereβ is a vector of slope coeﬃcients and Ft is a vector of Fama-French pricing factors at
timet. Multiplying GITSM by two ensures that the total value invested in the strategy is $2
and will not aﬀect the signiﬁcance of coeﬃcients. Panel B in Table9reports the regression
results. Consistent with Panel A, GITSM does not show signiﬁcant exposures to the Fama-
French factors. However, the inclusion of the time-varying factor eliminates the signiﬁcant
and positive alpha as shown in Panel A and the slope coeﬃcients ofTVC are signiﬁcant
at the 1% conﬁdence level in all cases.  Moreover, the adjustedR2s increase from 0.4% to
around 73%. Our results suggest that the time-varying factor is a signiﬁcant source of the
GITSM proﬁtability and can explain around 73% of the variation of the global time-series
momentum.
    TofurtherunderstandthesourcesofTVCreturns, wefollowGoyalandJegadeesh(2018)
and decompose the time-varying factor into two terms as follows:

                         TVCt =     NPMt×      EWMt+cov(NPMt,EWMt)                           (19)

where the ﬁrst term     NPMt×      EWMt is the expected return of the average net position, and
isreferredtoastheriskpremiumfactorinGoyalandJegadeesh(2018); andthesecondterm
is the covariance between the net position in market determined by the information from the
ﬁrst half hour and the equally-weighted global market in the last half hour, and is referred
to as the market timing component. SinceNPMt tend to be positive (negative) when more
markets perform strongly (poorly) in the ﬁrst half hour (e.g., an unexpected good news of
global economy might result in an uplift in many markets during the ﬁrst half hour), the
second term will add to the strategy performance when there is a positive autocorrelation
between the ﬁrst and the last half-hour return in the global market.
    Over our sample period, the average net position (NPMt) is 14.05% and the average
TVC (TVCt) is 5.40% per annum. The decomposition of TVC reveals that the return from

                                                     27
the risk premium term is 0.53% while that of the market timing component is 4.88%. The
market timing component accounts for 90.37% of the return on TVC, highlighting that the
proﬁtability of the time-varying factor is largely due to the market timing and not asset
picking ability.


6. What Drives Intraday Time-series Momentum?

6.1.  Liquidity provision and market impact

    Building on the slow moving capital model ofDuﬃe(2010),Bogousslavsky(2016) de-
velops a theoretical framework in which there are two types of traders trade in the market:
frequent traders who trade constantly and infrequent traders who need to be inactive for a
period after each trade due to the costs of being always attentive.  When liquidity trading
is transient,Bogousslavsky(2016) shows formally in his model that return autocorrelations
can switch sign, from negative to positive, as a result of the presence of infrequent traders.
Intuitively, this is due to that the infrequent traders absorb a liquidity shock by taking sub-
optimal position at timet and then unload the excess position at timet+k, causing another
liquidity shock at the same direction.31
    In the intraday context, the overnight information accumulation causes naturally tran-
sient liquidity shocks at market open. Infrequent traders, who supply liquidity with a price
concession at the open might have the intention to unload their sub-optimal positions at
a later time.  Given the well-known U shape of the intraday trading volume and volatility
(Jain and Joh(1988)), the optimal timing of this unloading may be the trading period im-
mediately prior to the market close, during which the market is the deepest and most liquid
(together with the market open).32 This unloading is therefore in the same direction as the
initial shock and causes the intraday momentum.Gao et al.(2018) conjecture this process
as a possible explanation for the ITSM.
    If this explanation holds, we argue that the level of liquidity plays a vital role.   In
particular, when the liquidity is low, there should be a relatively large market impact for



   31k is the length of inactive period.

   32Another motivation of rebalancing at the close is to avoid overnight risk (Gao et al.(2018)).



                                                       28
both the initial liquidity shock and the infrequent rebalancing at the close, so a stronger
intraday momentum would be expected. Conversely, when the liquidity is high, the market
impact of both the initial liquidity shock and the infrequent rebalancing at the close is
expected to be smaller, resulting in a weaker intraday momentum.
    Hence,wehypothesizethatthemoreilliquidthemarketis,thestrongerreturnseasonality
should be observed.  To test this, we sort at the end of the ﬁrst half hour of each day the
16 indices based on their estimated liquidity and then calculate the equally-weighted ITSM
return of the top, medium, and bottom 30 percents of the indices.
    Due to the lack of information on intraday quotes and volume in most countries, ap-
propriately estimating the liquidity at the frequency of our data is rather challenging. The
simplest-to-compute option that does not require information on trading volume is perhaps
themeasurebyRoll(1984): 2     √−cov(rt,rt−1). However,maybeduetothattheinformational
eﬃcient market assuption is hardly hold at intraday level, the autocovariance of minutely
returns are positive in nearly half of the days in our sample, making the adjustment for pos-
itive autocovariance informatioanlly costly. Therefore, we adopt the percent-cost High-Low
liquidity measure byCorwin and Schultz(2012) that uses only the high and low prices of
two consecutive time periods to estimate the spread.  The High-Low liquidity is computed
as follows:

                          S = 2(eα−1)1+eα
                                √2β−√β           √      γ
                          α =     3−2√2−            3−2√2                                                (20)

                                 1∑ [   (Ht+j    )]2           [   (Ht,t+1   )]2
                          β =         ln   Lt+j       , γ =      ln   Lt,t+1      ,
                                j=0
whereS stands for the High-Low liquidity measure,Ht andLt are the high price and low
price at timet,Ht,t+1 andLt,t+1 are the high price and the low price over two consecutive
time periodst andt+1.
    For each country, we generally follow the procedure in a note by Corwin and estimate
the spread in the ﬁrst half hour by averaging the estimates across overlapping ﬁve-minute
intervals.33 Speciﬁcally, we calculate the High-Low liquidity measure over every two consec-



  33The note is given by one of the authors ofCorwin and Schultz(2012), illustrating the use of the

                                                     29
utive ﬁve-minute intervals and then take the average across the overlapping intervals within
the ﬁrst half hour.34
    The ﬁrst three columns of Table10report the results.  Panel A tabulates the equally-
weighted ITSM strategy returns (multiplied by 2) and Sharpe ratio in the low, medium and
high liquidity groups.35  As shown in the table, we document a monotonic increase in the
EW-ITSM portfolio returns from high to low liquidity groups.  Speciﬁcally, the strategy
yields almost doubled raw returns in the low liquidity group compared to the high liquidity
group. A similar pattern can also be observed in the Sharpe ratios. This is consistent with
our hypothesis discussed above.
    Sinceweargueintheprevioussectionthatthetime-varyingcomponentmightbeamajor
contributor of the equally-weighted ITSM strategy return, we next investigate the behavior
ofthetime-varyingcomponentacrossthegroups. TheﬁrstthreecolumnsofPanelBofTable
10tabulates the time-varying factor (TVC) within each group as well as its components, i.e.
the risk premium and market timing.  We do not observe a clear trend in the TVC return
across liquidity groups, leading us to investigate the factor exposure for each group. Panel
C of Table10tabulates the results from the regression of EW-ITSM on the Fama-French
factorswithineachgroup. Forsimplicity, wereportonlythealphasandtheslopecoeﬃcients
ofTVCwithrespecttoﬁveFama-Frenchfactorsandthecross-sectionalmomentumfactor.36
As in the previous analysis, we compare the alphas before and after the inclusion of TVC.
The signiﬁcant alphas in the regression that do not include TVC suggest the EW-ITSM


High-Low estimateintheintradaysetting(http://sites.nd.edu/scorwin/files/2019/11/Application_
Intraday_Analysis.pdf).
   34Whilewehavethehighandlowpricesformostmarketsatminutelylevel,wedonothavethisinformation

for some countries in certain periods, e.g., Ireland data gives exactly the same number for high, low, and last
prices for each minute in the early phase of our sample period. By aggregating the data up to ﬁve-minute
intervals, we mitigate this problem. Straightforwardly, we pick up the highest and the lowest price from the
high, low, and last prices collectively in a ﬁve-minute interval, regardless if we have adequate high/low price
information.
   35Due to the inclusion of TVC in the Fama-French regressions later, we multiply the EW-ITSM excess

return by 2. To get the actual excess return, one just needs to divide the ﬁgures in Table10by 2.
   36For more detailed results, including the analysis with respect to other regression models, see TableB.4

andB.5inAppendix  B.

                                                        30
return in each group cannot be fully explained by Fama-French factors. However, a rather
striking result shown in the table is that the alpha in the low liquidity group survives even
with the inclusion of TVC. This infers that the EW-ITSM portfolio return in the bottom
illiquid group is not fully captured by the time-varying factor.

                                          [Table 10 about here.]

6.2.  Information discreteness and inattentive ‘frogs’

    A second explanation for the intraday time-series momentum proposed byGao et al.
(2018) is that some traders are simply slower than others causing under-reaction to the
overnight information.Da et al.(2014) propose the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ (FIP) hypothesis in
which investors are inclined to be inattentive and under-react to gently arrived information.
This under-reaction can be adjusted later in time causing momentum. In their paper, they
documentthatthecross-sectionalmomentumisstrongerwhentheinformationintheforma-
tion period is continuously arrived. A recent study byLim et al.(2018) tests this hypothesis
on the time-series momentum ofMoskowitz et al.(2012) by grouping individual US stocks
based on the information discreteness (ID), which is the measure of information arrival pro-
cessproposedbyDaetal.(2014). Theauthorsﬁndthatthetime-seriesmomentumperforms
better in the group of stocks in which the information arrives gently and continuously in the
formation period.
    Therefore, in our second hypothesis we expect to observe stronger intraday momentum
in markets where information arrives continuously. FollowingDa et al.(2014) andLim et al.
(2018) among others we deﬁne information discreteness (ID) as follows:

                                  IDt =sign(rFt )×(%negt−%post),                                     (21)

whererFt  istheﬁrsthalf-hourreturnondayt,%negt and%post arethepercentageofminutes
associated with a negative and positive return within the ﬁrst 30 minutes, respectively, on
dayt.
    To see how ID measures information incorporation process, consider the ﬁrst half-hour
returns from two days on same market,rFk  andrFs , triggered by equally eﬀective overnight



                                                      31
information,φOk  andφOs, which lead to an upward price movement.37  Now supposeφOk  is
smoothlyincorporatedintothepricewhileφOs isabsorbedbyafewsuddenpricemovements.
ThiscanbetranslatedintothatrFk hasahigherproportionofpositiveminutelyreturnsthan
doesrFs . Collectively:

                                              φOk =φOs
                                              rFk =rFs> 0                                                  (22)

                                              0≤ps<pk≤ 1,

wherepk andps are the proportion of positive minutely returns inrFk  andrFs .  Assuming
there is no zero-return minutes, we have:38

                                    1−2pk =IDk<IDs = 1−2ps,                                        (23)

    Therefore, a small ID implies that information is relatively gently absorbed while a large
ID is a sign of high degree of information discreteness.
    Similar to the previous subsection, we divide the 16 indices into three groups, at the end
of the ﬁrst half hour of each day, based on the information discreteness, and then calculate
the equally-weighted last half hour ITSM returns within each group.
    The last three columns of Table10report the results.  As in the liquidity groups, we
observe a monotonic increase in the EW-ITSM portfolio returns from large to small ID
groups.  The results imply that the hypothesis ofDa et al.(2014) is empirically related to
our intraday time-series momentum. Panel B of Table10shows an increasing pattern in the
TVC that is consistent with that of the EW-ITSM across ID groups.  The market timing
component takes advantage of the intraday autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and the last
half-hour returns.  Thus, its increase might imply that markets in which the information
arrives continuously tend to have stronger autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and last half-
hour returns which is consistent with the FIP hypothesis byDa et al.(2014) as well as other



   37In fact, so long as bothφOk  andφOs  are positive, it is not necessary to assume equality. But we keep it

for simplicity.
   38sign(rFk) =sign(rFs ) = 1,%negk−%posk = (1−pk)−pk = 1−2pk,and%negs−%poss = (1−ps)−ps =

1−2ps.

                                                      32
studies on the relation between investor attention and information arrival process in which
investors tend to underreact when information arrives gently (Byun et al.(2016) andHou
etal.(2009)). Finally, PanelCofTable10showsthatthesigniﬁcantalphasintheregression
that do not include TVC become insigniﬁcant once the TVC is included.


7. Conclusion

    With the rise of high-frequency trading, a growing number of academic studies are docu-
mentingintradayanomaliesinassetprices. TherecentpaperbyGaoetal.(2018)introduces
intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) in which the ﬁrst half-hour return signiﬁcantly pre-
dicts the ﬁnal half-hour return in US ETFs. The current paper studies ITSM in a broader
space of 16 international stock markets, with particular attention to their cross-country
relationship, investing potential, and the association of ITSM with market characteristics.
    Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst show that the phenomenon is both statistically and economically
pervasive around the world. Twelve out of 16 developed markets in our sample exhibit sta-
tisticalevidenceofintradaytime-seriesmomentum. Thewidelyobservedin-sampleevidence
of the intraday return predictability is also conﬁrmed in a thorough out-of-sample analysis
in the majority of countries. We examine a simple market timing strategy based on ITSM
and we document signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts of country ITSM with respect to passive
strategies where er ﬁnd signiﬁcant and positive alphas in most countries in the spanning
regressions of the ITSM against passive strategies.  Overall, our international evidence is
largely consistent with that ofGao et al.(2018) in the US market indicating that ITSM is
not a US-only eﬀect.
    Having conﬁrmed ITSM globally, we then study the cross-country relationship of the
eﬀect.  Particularly, we examine the existence and extent of the global and regional com-
monalityacrossindividualITSM.OurevidenceindicatesthattheITSMstrategysharesome
commonality across countries, but the explanatory power of the global factor is weak while
relatively stronger regional factors are observed. We further investigate the leading predic-
tive role of the US ﬁrst half-hour return and ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence in 9 out of 16 markets.
Naturally, this leads to the possibility of constructing global portfolios.
    Byapplyingsixcommonlyusedportfolioconstructiontechniquesonthreetypesofglobal

                                                     33
intradaytime-seriesmomentum(GITSM),wedocumentremarkableeconomicgainsofinvest-
ing ITSM globally than individually. We show that the proﬁtability of an equally-weighted
GITSM portfolio cannot be explained by global equity factors and further decomposition
shows that a time varying factor is largely responsible for its proﬁtability.
    Finally, we explore the association of ITSM with two market characteristics, liquidity
provision and information discreteness, that are closely related to the possible explanations
of the phenomenon as proposed inGao et al.(2018).  The evidence implies that the eﬀect
of ITSM tends to be stronger when the liquidity provision is limited and when there is
information continuity, which is consistent with our expectations based on the infrequent
rebalancing model ofBogousslavsky(2016) and the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ model ofDa et al.
(2014).




































                                                     34
References

Ashley, R.; C. W. J. Granger; and R. Schmalensee. “Advertising and Aggregate Consump-
  tion: An Analysis of Causality.” Econometrica, 48 (1980), 1149–1167.

Asness, C. S.; T. J. Moskowitz; and L. H. Pedersen. “Value and Momentum Everywhere.”
  Journal of Finance, 68 (2013), 929–985.

Barclay, M. J., and T. Hendershott. “Price Discovery and Trading After Hours.” Review of
  Financial Studies, 16 (2003), 1041–1073.

Barndorﬀ-Nielson, O. E.; P. R. Hansen; A. Lunde; and N. Shephard. “Realized Kernels in
  Pratice: Trade and Quotes.” Econometrics Journal, 12 (2009), 1–32.

Barroso,  P.,  and  P.  F.  Maio.     “The  Risk-Return  Tradeoﬀ  Among  Equity  Factors.”
  Working paper,  available at  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
  id=2909085 (2019).

Barroso, P., and P. Santa-Clara.  “Momentum Has Its Moments.”   Journal of Financial
  Economics, 116 (2015), 111 – 120.

Becker, K. G.; J. E. Finnerty; and M. Gupta.  “The Intertemporal Relation Between the
  U.S. and Japanese Stock Markets.” Journal of Finance, 45 (1990), 1297–1306.

Bogousslavsky,V. “InfrequentRebalancing,ReturnAutocorrelation,andSeasonality.” Jour-
  nal of Finance, 71 (2016), 2967–3006.

Brockman, P.; D. Y. Chung; and C. P´erignon. “Commonality in Liquidity: A Global Per-
  spective.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44 (2009), 851–882.

Brogaard, J.; T. Hendershott; and R. Riordan. “High-Frequency Trading and Price Discov-
  ery.” Review of Financial Studies, 27 (2014), 2267–2306.

Byun, S. J.; S. S. Lim; and S. H. Yun.  “Continuing Overreaction and Stock Return Pre-
  dictability.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 51 (2016), 2015–2046.



                                                    35
Campbell,J.Y.,andY.Hamao. “PredictableStockReturnsintheUnitedStatesandJapan:
  AStudyofLong-TermCapitalMarketIntegration.” Journal of Finance, 47(1992), 43–69.

Campbell, J. Y., and S. B. Thompson.  “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample:
  Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?”    Review of Financial Studies, 21 (2008),
  1509–1531.

Cenesizoglu,  T.,  and A. Timmermann.   “Do Return Prediction Models Add Economic
  Value?”  Journal of Banking & Finance, 36 (2012), 2974–2987.

Chaboud, A. P.; B. Chiquoine; E. Hjalmarsson; and C. Vega.  “Rise of the Machines:  Al-
  gorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market.”   Journal of Finance, 69 (2014),
  2045–2084.

Chan, L. K. C.; N. Jegadeesh; and J. Lakonishok.  “Momentum Strategies.”   Journal of
  Finance, 51 (1996), 1681–1713.

Chordia, T.; R. Roll; and A. Subrahmanyam.   “Commonality in Liquidity.”   Journal of
  Financial Economics, 56 (2000), 3–28.

Choueifaty, Y., and Y. Coignard. “Toward Maximum Diversiﬁcation.” Journal of Portfolio
  Management, 35 (2008), 40–51.

Clark, T. E., and M. W. McCracken. “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encompassing
  for Nested Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 105 (2001), 85–110.

Clark,T.E.,andK.D.West. “UsingOut-of-sampleMeanSquaredPredictionErrorstoTest
  the Martingale Diﬀerence Hypothesis.” Journal of Econometrics, 135 (2006), 155–186.

Clark, T. E., and K. D. West. “Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Predictive Accuracy
  in Nested Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 138 (2007), 291–311.

Clements, M., and D. Hendry.  Forecasting Economic Time Series.  Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge, UK (1998).

Corwin, S. A., and P. Schultz.  “A Simple Way to Estimate Bid-Ask Spreads from Daily
  High and Low Prices.” Journal of Finance, 67 (2012), 719–760.

                                                   36
Cumming, D.; L. Helge Haß; and D. Schweizer. “Strategic Asset Allocation and the Role of
  Alternative Investments.” European Financial Management, 20 (2014), 521–547.

Da, Z.; U. G. Gurun; and M. Warachka.  “Frog in the Pan:  Continuous Information and
  Momentum.” Review of Financial Studies, 27 (2014), 2171–2218.

Daniel, K., and T. J. Moskowitz. “Momentum Crashes.”  Journal of Financial Economics,
  122 (2016), 221–247.

Diebold, F. X., and R. S. Mariano. “Comparing Predictive Accuracy.” Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics, 20 (2002), 134–144.

Duﬃe,D. “PresidentialAddress: AssetPriceDynamicswithSlow-MovingCapital.” Journal
  of Finance, 65 (2010), 1237–1267.

Fama,E.F.,andK.R.French.“Size,Value,andMomentuminInternationalStockReturns.”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 105 (2012), 457–472.

Ferreira, M. A., and P. Santa-Clara.  “Forecasting Stock Market Returns: The Sum of the
  Parts is More Than the Whole.” Journal of Financial Economics, 100 (2011), 514–537.

Fishe,R.P.H.;R.Haynes;andE.Onur. “AnticipatoryTradersandTradingSpeed.” Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 54 (2019), 729–758.

Fong, K. Y. L.; C. A. Trzcinka; and C. W. Holden. “What Are the Best Liquidity Proxies
  for Global Research?”  Review of Finance, 21 (2017), 1355–1401.

Gao,L.; Y.Han; S.Z.Li; andG.Zhou. “MarketIntradayMomentum.” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 129 (2018), 394–414.

George, T. J., and C.-Y. Hwang.  “The 52-week High and Momentum Investing.”  Journal
  of Finance, 59 (2004), 2145–2176.

Georgopoulou, A., and J. G. Wang.  “The Trend Is Your Friend:  Time-Series Momentum
  Strategies across Equity and Commodity Markets.” Review of Finance, 21 (2016), 1557–
  1592.


                                                   37
Goyal, A., and N. Jegadeesh. “Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Tests of Return Predictabil-
  ity: What Is the Diﬀerence?”  Review of Financial Studies, 31 (2018), 1784–1824.

Goyal, A., and S. Wahal. “Is Momentum an Echo?”  Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis, 50 (2015), 1237–1267.

Goyal, A., and I. Welch. “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios.” Manage-
  ment Science, 49 (2003), 639–654.

Griﬃn, J. M.; X. Ji; and J. S. Martin.  “Momentum Investing and Business Cycle Risk:
  Evidence from Pole to Pole.” Journal of Finance, 58 (2003), 2515–2547.

Gupta, T., and B. Kelly.  “Factor Momentum Everywhere.”  Journal of Portfolio Manage-
  ment, 45 (2019), 13–36.

Ham, H.; H. Cho; H. Kim; and D. Ryu.  “Time-series Momentum in China’s Commodity
  Futures Market.” Journal of Futures Markets, 39 (2019), 1515–1528.

He, X.-Z., and K. Li.  “Proﬁtability of Time Series Momentum.”   Journal of Banking &
  Finance, 53 (2015), 140 – 157.

Hendershott, T., and R. Riordan.  “Algorithmic Trading and the Market for Liquidity.”
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48 (2013), 1001–1024.

Heston, S. L.; R. A. Korajczyk; and R. Sadka.  “Intraday Patterns in the Cross-section of
  Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance, 65 (2010), 1369–1407.

Hollstein, F.; M. Prokopczuk; and C. W. Simen. “The Conditional CAPM Revisited: Evi-
  dence from High-Frequency Betas.” Management Science, Forthcoming.

Hong, H., and J. C. Stein.  “A Uniﬁed Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and
  Overreaction in Asset Markets.” Journal of Finance, 54 (1999), 2143–2184.

Hou, K.; W. Xiong; and L. Peng. “A Tale of Two Anomalies: The Implications of Investor
  Attention for Price and Earnings Momentum.”  Working paper, available at https://
  papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=976394 (2009).


                                                    38
Huang, D.; J. Li; L. Wang; and G. Zhou. “Time Series Momentum: Is It There?”  Journal
  of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Hurst, B.; Y. H. Ooi; and L. H. Pedersen.  “A Century of Evidence on Trend-Following
  Investing.” Journal of Portfolio Management, 44 (2017), 15–29.

Jain, P. C., and G.-H. Joh. “The Dependence between Hourly Prices and Trading Volume.”
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 23 (1988), 269–283.

Jegadeesh, N., andS.Titman. “ReturnstoBuyingWinnersandSellingLosers: Implications
  for Stock Market Eﬃciency.” Journal of Finance, 48 (1993), 65–91.

Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman.  “Proﬁtability of Momentum Strategies:  An Evaluation of
  Alternative Explanations.” Journal of Finance, 56 (2001), 699–720.

Jordan, S. J.; A. Vivian; and M. E. Wohar. “Location, Location, Location: Currency Eﬀects
  and Return Predictability?”  Applied Economics, 47 (2015), 1883–1898.

Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh.  “On the Predictability of Stock Returns:  An Asset-
  Allocation Perspective.” Journal of Finance, 51 (1996), 385–424.

Kim, A. Y.; Y. Tse; and J. K. Wald.  “Time Series Momentum and Volatility Scaling.”
  Journal of Financial Markets, 30 (2016), 103–124.

Kirby, C., and B. Ostdiek. “It’s All in the Timing: Simple Active Portfolio Strategies that
  Outperform Na¨ıve Diversiﬁcation.”  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47
  (2012), 437–467.

Komarov, O. “Intra-day Momentum.” Working paper, available at https://papers.ssrn.
  com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2905713 (2017).

Lawrenz, J., and J. Zorn. “Predicting International Stock Returns with Conditional Price-
  to-fundamental Ratios.” Journal of Empirical Finance, 43 (2017), 159 – 184.

Ledoit, O., and M. Wolf. “Robust Performance Hypothesis Testing With the Sharpe Ratio.”
  Journal of Empirical Finance, 15 (2008), 850–859.


                                                    39
Lim, B. Y.; J. Wang; and Y. Yao.  “Time-series Momentum in Nearly 100 Years of Stock
  Returns.” Journal of Banking & Finance, 97 (2018), 283–296.

Liu, M.; Q. Liu; and T. Ma. “The 52-week High Momentum Strategy in International Stock
  Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 30 (2011), 180–204.

Lou, D.; C. Polk; and S. Skouras.  “A Tug of War:  Overnight Versus Intraday Expected
  Returns.” Journal of Financial Economics, 134 (2019), 192 – 213.

Malceniece,L.;K.Malcenieks;andT.J.Putni¸nˇs.“HighFrequencyTradingandComovement
  in Financial Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

McCracken, M. W. “Asymptotics for Out of Sample Tests of Granger Causality.”  Journal
  of Econometrics, 140 (2007), 719–752.

Menkhoﬀ, L., L. Sarno; M. Schmeling; and A. Schrimpf. “Currency Momentum Strategies.”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 106 (2012), 660–684.

Moskowitz, T. J., and M. Grinblatt.  “Do Industries Explain Momentum?”    Journal of
  Finance, 54 (1999), 1249–1290.

Moskowitz, T. J.; Y. H. Ooi; and L. H. Pedersen.  “Time Series Momentum.”  Journal of
  Financial Economics, 104 (2012), 228–250.

Neely, C. J.; D. E. Rapach; J. Tu; and G. Zhou.  “Forecasting the Equity Risk Premium:
  The Role of Technical Indicators.” Management Science, 60 (2014), 1772–1791.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Deﬁnite, Heteroskedasticity and
  Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica, 55 (1987), 703–708.

O’Hara, M. “High Frequency Market Microstructure.” Journal of Financial Economics, 116
  (2015), 257–270.

Rakowski, D., and X. Wang.  “The Dynamics of Short-term Mutual Fund Flows and Re-
  turns: A Time-series and Cross-sectional Investigation.”  Journal of Banking & Finance,
  33 (2009), 2102 – 2109.


                                                    40
Rapach, D. E.; J. K. Strauss; and G. Zhou.  “Out-of-Sample Equity Premium Prediction:
  Combination Forecasts and Links to the Real Economy.” Review of Financial Studies, 23
  (2010), 821–862.

Rapach, D. E.; J. K. Strauss; and G. Zhou.  “International Stock Return Predictability:
  What Is the Role of the United States?”  Journal of Finance, 68 (2013), 1633–1662.

Rapach, D. E., and M. E. Wohar.   “In-sample vs. Out-of-sample Tests of Stock Return
  Predictability in the Context of Data Mining.” Journal of Empirical Finance, 13 (2006),
  231–247.

Roll,R. “ASimpleImplicitMeasureoftheEﬀectiveBid-AskSpreadinanEﬃcientMarket.”
  The Journal of Finance, 39 (1984), 1127–1139.

Welch, I., and A. Goyal. “A Comprehensive Look at The Empirical Performance of Equity
  Premium Prediction.” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (2008), 1455–1508.

West, K. D.  “Asymptotic Inference about Predictive Ability.”  Econometrica, 64 (1996),
  1067–1084.

Xu, H. “Reversal, Momentum and Intraday Returns.” Working paper, available at https:
  //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2991183 (2017).






















                                                   41
Appendix  A. Annualizing Moments

   We use the rescaling technique similar to Appendix B inCumming et al.(2014) to
annualize daily mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis.  Supposeri is the daily
returnondayiandR istheannualreturn. Undertheassumptionthatthereare252trading
days in a year and theris are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), it is clear
that the annualized mean ¯R = ¯r·252 and the annualized standard deviationσR =σr·√252.
Therefore, the annualized SkewnessSkew(R) is:

                    Skew(R) =E(R− ¯R)3σ3R

                                =E(∑252i=1ri−252¯r)3
                                       252√252σ3r
                                =E[∑252i=1(ri−¯r)]3
                                   ∑252252√∑252252σ3r∑252
                                =    i=1    j=1    k=1E[(ri−¯r)(rj−¯r)(rk−¯r)]
                                   ∑252              252√252σ3r
                                =    i=1Skew(ri)σ3r
                                      252√252σ3r

                                =Skew(ri)√252 ,

where

                                              E[(ri−¯r)(rj−¯r)(rk−¯r)]

                          =    E[(ri−¯r)3] =Skew(ri)σ3r,   ifi =j =k;
                             0                                           otherwise.















                                                   42
and the annualized KurtosisKurt(R) is:

              Kurt(R) =E(R− ¯R)4σ4R

                         =E(∑252i=1ri−252¯r)4
                                     2522σ4r
                         =E[∑252i=1(ri−¯r)]4
                             ∑2522522σ4r∑252∑252  ∑252
                         =      i=1    j=1    k=1    l=1E[(ri−¯r)(rj−¯r)(rk−¯r)(rl−¯r)]
                             ∑252                          2522σ4r
                         =      i=1Kurt(ri)σ4r + 252·2512 · 4·32σ4r
                                            2522σ4r

                         =Kurt(ri)252     + 25184,

where

                                                   E[(ri−¯r)(rj−¯r)(rk−¯r)(rl−¯r)]

                  E[(ri−¯r)4] =Kurt(ri)σ4r,   ifi =j =k =l;

             =  E[(ri−¯r)2(rj−¯r)2] =σ4r,    if respective two ofi,j,k,l are equal;

                  0                                           otherwise.

























                                                       43
Appendix  B. Additional Tables

                                     [Table B.1 about here.]

                                     [Table B.2 about here.]

                                     [Table B.3 about here.]

                                     [Table B.4 about here.]

                                     [Table B.5 about here.]


Appendix  C. Principal Component Analysis With Monthly Aggregated ITSM
                  Returns

                                     [Figure C.1 about here.]
































                                                 44
Figures

















                Panel A: Variance Explained                      Panel B: Front View
















                       Panel C: Top View                               Panel D: End View

                                Figure 1: Global Principal Component Analysis

Plotted are the results of global principal component analysis. Panel A depicts the proportional eigenvalues
associated with each eigenvector.  It shows how much variance is explained by each principal component.
The proportional values (in percentage) are stated above the bars.  Panel B to D are the front view, top
view, and end view of the rotated data plotted in a 3-D space of which the axes are the PC1, PC2, and PC3
respectively. Each point represents a rotated observation whereas the arrows are the projection of original
return series onto the new principal component space, implying the relation of the series and the PCs. Data
are normalized and standardized and the sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.








                                                              45
                               Figure 2: Regional First Principal Components

Plotted are the ﬁrst principal components obtained from the regional principal component analysis which is
appliedtothreegeographicalsub-samples,namely,Americancountries(Amer),Asia-Paciﬁccountries(A-P),
and European countries (EU). Data are normalized and standardized and the sample period spans from 04
October 2005 to 29 December 2017.











                                                            46
      Figure C.1: Principal Component Analysis With Monthly Aggregated ITSM Returns

Plotted are the proportional eigenvalues associated with each eigenvector obtained from the principal com-
ponent analysis on monthly aggregated ITSM returns.  It shows how much variance is explained by each
principalcomponent. Theproportionalvalues(inpercentage)arestatedabovethebars. Dataarenormalized
and standardized and the sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.











                                                           47
Tables


                                                           Table 1: Indices

                             Index                                        RIC          Trading Hours (local time)
 Australia               S&P ASX 200                                 .AXJO                      10:00 - 16:00
 Austria                  Austrian Traded Index                   .ATX                         09:00 - 17:30
 Canada                  S&P/TSX Composite Index           .GSPTSE                  09:30 - 16:00
 France                   CAC 40 Stock Market Index          .FCHI                        09:00 - 17:30
 Germany               DAX PERFORMANCE-INDEX    .GDAXI                    09:00 - 17:30
 Ireland                   ISEQ Overall Index                        .ISEQ                        08:00 - 16:30
 Japan                    Nikkei Stock Average 225               .N225                        09:00 - 15:00
 Netherlands           AEX Amsterdam Index                  .AEX                         09:00 - 17:30
 New Zealand         NZX 50 Index Gross                       .NZ50                        10:00 - 18:00
 Norway                  Oslo Exchange All-share Index       .OSEAX                    09:00 - 16:30
 Portugal                PSI 20 INDEX                                .PSI20                       08:00 - 16:30
 Spain                     Ibex 35 Index                                  .IBEX                       09:00 - 17:30
 Sweden                  OMX Stockholm All-share Index   .OMXSPI                  09:00 - 17:30
 Switzerland           SMI Index                                       .SSMI                        09:00 - 17:30
 United Kingdom   FTSE 100                                       .FTSE                       08:00 - 16:30
 United States        S&P500                                           .SPX                         09:30 - 16:00
This table presents the 16 developed markets based on the MSCI classiﬁcation list along with their
corresponding stock market indices. RIC stands for the Reuters Instrument Code.




























                                                                    48
             Table 2: Summary Statistics of the First and Last Half-hour Returns

                                  No.Days   Mean (%)   SD (%)   Skewness   Kurtosis
  Australia        First        3104             7.826           22.508         -0.009           3.028
                       Last        3104             5.105            5.866          -0.042           3.068
  Austria           First        3050            22.191          19.346          0.007            3.067
                       Last        3050            15.379           6.714           0.108            3.093
  Canada           First        3073             8.538           11.345          0.029            3.067
                       Last        3073             4.185            4.586          -0.007           3.135
  France            First        3136             8.995           16.940         -0.023           3.053
                       Last        3136             3.363            5.821          -0.006           3.023
  Germany        First        3110            12.817          16.504         -0.036           3.042
                       Last        3110             3.357            5.457           0.016            3.047
  Ireland            First        3102            21.124          18.074          0.113            3.236
                       Last        3102             6.557            6.646           0.027            3.070
  Japan             First        3003            18.465          25.601         -0.011           3.021
                       Last        3003             1.838            6.093           0.041            3.120
  Netherlands    First        3134            12.490          15.879         -0.020           3.048
                       Last        3134             2.459            5.363          -0.023           3.028
  Norway           First        3075            20.800          12.765         -0.023           3.025
                       Last        3075             4.453            7.491          -0.013           3.046
  NZ                  First        3078             3.153           16.875         -0.005           3.045
                       Last        3078             1.289            1.549           0.038            3.034
  Portugal         First        3134            16.246          15.676         -0.029           3.060
                       Last        3134             8.974            5.177          -0.026           3.019
  Spain              First        3124             5.731           17.656         -0.023           3.067
                       Last        3124            11.022           5.651          -0.011           3.019
  Sweden           First        3076             0.342           11.977         -0.014           3.020
                       Last        3076             7.634            4.391          -0.016           3.021
  Switzerland    First        3079            11.001          12.806          0.020            3.045
                       Last        3079            -2.272           5.276          -0.019           3.035
  UK                 First        3102             9.201           15.108         -0.061           3.087
                       Last        3102             1.733            5.211           0.020            3.024
  US                  First        3082             2.867           11.343         -0.022           3.023
                       Last        3082             0.697            5.850          -0.013           3.094
This table reports the summary statistics for the ﬁrst and last half-hour returns of the
16 developed equity market indices.  The ﬁrst and last half-hour returns are deﬁned
in equation1.  The table reports the number of days (i.e.  No.Days), mean, standard
deviation (i.e. SD), skewness, and kurtosis for each equity market index. The sample
period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.  Note that the number of
available trading days varies from country to country due to diﬀerent holiday systems
and data availability limitations. The mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis
are annualized.  For the calculation of the annualized third and fourth moments see
Appendix  A.



                                                             49
50
                                          Table 4: Out-of-sample Analysis

                     Ave.Intercept Ave.βF  R2OOS Rst.R2OOS MSPE−adj. ENCNEW
     Australia   5.36***              4.49***     1.23     1.10            3.38***              46.14**
       Austria   16.02***            1.19          0.14     0.12            1.60*                 2.56**
       Canada   6.12***              0.00          -0.14    -0.25           -0.84                  -1.09
        France   3.88                   5.97***     -0.35    0.22            2.34***              27.81**
     Germany   2.79                   3.62***     -0.64    0.11            1.02                   7.32**
        Ireland   5.73**               1.42          0.18     0.15            1.70**                3.01**
         Japan   3.78*                 5.04***     -0.20    -1.32           2.41***              47.25**
 Netherlands   2.52                   5.35***     -2.39    -0.79           0.60                   6.08**
       Norway   1.85                   5.92***     0.92     1.08            3.10***              19.84**
             NZ   1.41**               0.12          -0.03    -0.02           -0.25                  -0.16
      Portugal   7.91***              3.14***     -0.25    -0.03           1.01                   7.97**
          Spain   12.63***            4.60***     -0.28    0.19            1.72**                22.19**
       Sweden   9.57***              2.17          1.18     0.90            3.36***              16.23**
  Switzerland   -3.23                  3.84**       -0.01    0.05            1.56*                 8.69**
             UK   2.25                   4.96***     -1.25    -0.58           1.00                   10.82**
             US   0.99                   11.67***   -3.10    0.25            2.07**                68.57**
This table reports the individual out-of-sample analysis.  Using the ﬁrst ﬁve years (2005-
2010) as the initial estimation period, we recursively estimate the predictive regression in
each market by adding one day at a time. The intercept and slope coeﬃcients are averaged
from individual regressions.  The stars next to them are assigned based on averageNewey
and West(1987) t-statistics (unreported).   The last four columns reportCampbell and
Thompson(2008)           R2OOS,Rst.R2OOS,Clark and West(2007)      MSPE−adjusted, andClark
andMcCracken(2001)     ENCNEW respectively. WeapplyNeweyandWest(1987)corrections
in computing theClark and West(2007)        MSPE−adjusted. ForENCNEW, we use critical
values of 1.280 and 2.085 for 5% and 10% conﬁdence levels, given byClark and McCracken
(2001).  The slope coeﬃcients are scaled by 100.  The sample period spans from 04 Oct
2005 to 29 Dec 2017. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.

















                                                           51
Table 5: Economic Signiﬁcance of Individual Intraday Time Series Momentum


                          StrategyMean (%)SD (%)SkewnessKurtosis  Sharpe  ρ  α (%)   ARatio

           Australia     ITSM      2.971      5.823     0.047      3.075     0.510
                             AL        4.152      5.820     -0.084     3.077     0.713   -0.099   3.384     0.584
                             BH        3.594     25.612    -0.026     3.019     0.140    0.019    2.956     0.508

            Austria      ITSM      2.209      6.807     -0.112     3.107     0.324
                             AL       15.198     6.740     0.113      3.107   2.255***-0.071   3.293     0.485
                             BH        3.242     29.034    -0.001     3.020     0.112    0.077    2.150     0.317
            Canada      ITSM     -1.668     4.227     -0.019     3.045     -0.395
                             AL        4.275      4.220     0.084      3.045   1.013***-0.047  -1.466   -0.347
                             BH        4.979     15.985    0.004      3.040     0.311    0.064   -1.751   -0.415

             France       ITSM      5.149      5.920     0.008      3.018     0.870
                             AL        2.810      5.926     -0.009     3.018     0.474   -0.0535.298***  0.896
                             BH        4.836     25.805    0.012      3.023     0.187    0.048 5.095***  0.862
           Germany     ITSM      4.105      5.591     0.053      3.051     0.734
                             AL        3.764      5.592     0.027      3.051     0.673   -0.031 4.222**   0.756
                             BH        7.253     24.763    -0.005     3.017     0.293    0.053  4.019**   0.720

            Ireland      ITSM      3.297      6.421     0.014      3.031     0.513
                             AL        4.435      6.418     -0.055     3.032     0.691   -0.036  3.455*    0.538
                             BH        3.980     25.516    -0.033     3.031     0.156   -0.027   3.324     0.518

             Japan       ITSM      4.416      6.142     -0.014     3.117     0.719
                             AL        3.279      6.145     0.113      3.116     0.534   -0.052 4.586**   0.748
                             BH       12.865    31.756    -0.010     3.028     0.405   -0.027 4.483**   0.730
         Netherlands   ITSM      2.378      5.412     0.016      3.025     0.439
                             AL        1.824      5.413     -0.027     3.025     0.337   -0.095   2.552     0.474
                             BH        1.090     23.888    -0.007     3.030     0.046   -0.037   2.387     0.441
            Norway      ITSM      7.328      7.529     0.008      3.053     0.973
                             AL        4.193      7.539     -0.036     3.053     0.556   -0.0287.446***  0.990
                             BH        5.724     21.902    -0.026     3.022     0.261*   0.024 7.280***  0.967

               NZ         ITSM      0.495      1.513     0.036      3.022     0.327
                             AL        1.618      1.510     0.013      3.022     1.071    0.030    0.445     0.295
                             BH        9.980     19.145    -0.021     3.028     0.521    0.071    0.439     0.291

           Portugal     ITSM      3.133      5.305     -0.004     3.018     0.591
                             AL        8.792      5.280     -0.026     3.019    1.665** -0.009  3.213*    0.606
                             BH       -1.277    23.890    0.010      3.020     -0.053   0.067   3.152*    0.596

             Spain       ITSM      3.323      5.784     0.008      3.016     0.575
                             AL       11.157     5.745     -0.006     3.017   1.942*** 0.015   3.159*    0.546
                             BH        9.208     27.886    0.026      3.026     0.330    0.123   3.088*    0.538

            Sweden      ITSM      2.531      4.391     -0.016     3.017     0.576
                             AL        7.483      4.368     -0.008     3.018    1.713** -0.057  2.958*    0.675
                             BH        3.762     19.740    -0.003     3.009     0.191    0.009    2.523     0.575

         Switzerland   ITSM      0.326      5.262     -0.037     3.038     0.062
                             AL        -1.503     5.261     -0.002     3.038     -0.286  -0.020   0.296     0.056
                             BH       -1.716    22.534    -0.065     3.111     -0.076   0.087    0.361     0.069

               UK         ITSM      2.605      5.134     0.014      3.018     0.507
                             AL        1.077      5.136     0.009      3.018     0.210   -0.047  2.656*    0.518
                             BH        0.841     22.144    0.008      3.036     0.038    0.038   2.598*    0.506

               US         ITSM      6.567      5.892     0.086      3.099     1.115
                             AL        0.033      5.907     -0.028     3.099    0.006** -0.106 6.570**   1.122
                             BH        7.465     19.411    -0.032     3.045     0.385   -0.045 6.669**   1.133
          This table presents the performance of intraday time-series momentum (i.e.  ITSM) along
         with two benchmark strategies, Always-long (i.e.AL) and Buy-and-hold (i.e.BH), for each of
         the 16 equity markets. ITSM opens a long (short) position at the beginning of the last half
         hourifthereturnduringtheﬁrsthalfhouronthesametradingdayispositive(negative),and
         closesthepositionsatthemarketclose. TheAlways-long strategytakesalwaysalongposition
         in the last half hour every trading day and the Buy-and-hold strategy holds the asset from
         the beginning until the end of the sample period. We report the Mean, Standard Deviation
         (SD), Skewness, Kurtosis and the Sharpe ratio for each strategy and market. The table also
         presents the correlation (ρ) between the ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns. Theα
         and appraisal ratio (ARatio) are based on the regression:rI,t =α+βrbenchmark,t +ϵt,
         whererI,t andrbenchmark,t arereturnsfromITSMandbenchmarkstrategies, respectively.
         The appraisal ratio is computed asα/σϵ whereσϵ is the standard error of the regression.
         Standard errors are adjusted usingNewey and West(1987).We test the hypothesis that the
         Sharpe ratios of the ITSM and the AL or BH strategies are equal followingLedoit and Wolf
         (2008). We use Newey-West (1987) standard errors for the statistical signiﬁcance of alpha.
         Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness, Kurtosis, Sharpe ratio, andα’s are annualized.
         *, **, and *** denote signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% conﬁdence levels, respectively. The
         sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.










                                                                   52
53
54
55
56
    Table 10: Cross-sectional Sorting Analysis of Intraday Time-series Momentum

                       Small      Medium   Large          Small      Medium   Large
                                Panel A: Spread                        Panel B: Volatility
AVE(%)           2.67***   3.33***     3.23***       2.57***   3.02***     3.61***
                       (3.24)      (3.47)       (3.07)          (3.10)      (3.11)       (2.97)
SD                    2.61         3.07          3.54             2.67         3.05          3.64
Sharpe Ratio   1.02         1.09          0.91             0.96         0.99          0.99
Skewness          0.01         0.00          -0.01            0.05         0.02          -0.01
Kurtosis           3.02         3.02          3.03             3.04         3.02          3.01

                                   Panel C: ID                        Panel D: Individualism
AVE(%)           4.21***   3.75***     1.15             3.44***   3.19***     2.57***
                       (4.27)      (3.90)       (1.17)          (3.01)      (3.83)       (2.69)
SD                    3.07         3.03          3.15             3.63         2.67          2.80
Sharpe Ratio   1.37         1.24          0.37             0.95         1.19          0.92
Skewness          0.01         0.03          0.02             0.02         -0.02         0.05
Kurtosis           3.02         3.01          3.05             3.01         3.02          3.03


































                                                        57
                              Table B.1: Individual ITSM in Local Currency

                                        Intercept      βF         Adj.R2 (%)
           Australia               3.15***                  4.76***               3.92
                                        (3.27)                     (5.59)
              Austria               13.84***                0.61                    -0.01
                                        (6.21)                     (0.38)
             Canada               4.87***                  2.00                    0.24
                                        (3.54)                     (1.10)
               France               0.67                       5.93***               2.68
                                        (0.41)                     (5.01)
           Germany               1.26                       3.98***               1.22
                                        (0.82)                     (3.45)
              Ireland               3.10*                      1.63*                  0.17
                                        (1.67)                     (1.84)
                Japan               0.65                       5.60***               3.70
                                        (0.49)                     (4.28)
       Netherlands               -0.10                      5.37***               2.32
                                        (-0.07)                   ( 3.73)
             Norway               1.10                       7.05***               1.70
                                        (0.48)                     (4.24)
                    NZ               0.09**                    -0.01                   -0.03
                                        ( 2.39)                   (-0.75)
            Portugal               5.63***                  3.33***               0.99
                                        (4.06)                     (3.99)
                Spain               9.24***                  4.24***               1.43
                                        (5.54)                     (3.53)
              Sweden               7.62***                  5.46***               3.20
                                        (5.75)                     (6.58)
       Switzerland               1.24                       4.17***               1.45
                                        (0.92)                     (2.89)
                    UK               -0.54                      6.96***               3.26
                                        (-0.37)                   ( 4.99)
                    US               0.14                       9.57***               3.41
                                        (0.09)                     (3.45)
In this table, we replicate the in-sample statistical analysis conducted in Panel
A Table3but using data in local currency.   Returns are annualized and in
percentage. TheNewey and West(1987)        t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017. *, **, and
*** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.






                                                           58
Table B.2: Economic Signiﬁcance of Individual Intraday Time Series Momentum


                           StrategyMean (%)SD (%)SkewnessKurtosis  Sharpe  ρ   α (%)   ARatio

            Australia     ITSM      4.686      3.306     0.028      3.023     1.418
                              AL        2.857      3.314     0.012      3.023     0.862    0.010  4.657***   1.409
                              BH        3.330     16.838    -0.028     3.016   0.198*** 0.016  4.675***   1.415

             Austria      ITSM      0.839      6.368     -0.135     3.134     0.132
                              BH        1.496     25.026    -0.008     3.020     0.060    0.078     0.809     0.128AL       14.014     6.307     0.151      3.134   2.222***-0.096    2.197     0.347

             Canada      ITSM      0.070      4.420     0.013      3.083     0.016
                              AL        5.046      4.408     0.112      3.082    1.145** -0.070    0.425     0.096
                              BH        4.508     17.814    -0.024     3.048     0.253    0.050     0.015     0.003
              France       ITSM      2.827      5.036     -0.002     3.024     0.561
                              AL        0.756      5.039     0.000      3.024     0.150   -0.070   2.879*     0.573
                              BH        2.977     22.175    0.007      3.019     0.134    0.043    2.798*     0.556
            Germany     ITSM      2.677      4.931     0.059      3.067     0.543
                              AL        2.306      4.932     0.042      3.068     0.468   -0.036   2.759*     0.560
                              BH        5.422     21.353    -0.003     3.018     0.254    0.049    2.615*     0.531

              Ireland      ITSM      4.374      5.489     0.024      3.042     0.797
                              AL        1.262      5.496     -0.059     3.043     0.230   -0.060  4.450**    0.812
                              BH        2.446     23.008    -0.033     3.032     0.106   -0.069  4.414**    0.806

              Japan       ITSM      5.347      5.384     0.030      3.080     0.993
                              AL        2.437      5.392     0.070      3.079     0.452   -0.020 5.396***   1.003
                              BH       10.366    24.526    -0.015     3.034     0.423   -0.021 5.395***   1.003

          Netherlands   ITSM      1.118      4.514     0.036      3.030      0.248AL        -0.075     4.516     -0.029     3.030     -0.017  -0.083    1.112     0.247
                              BH       -0.670    20.473    -0.017     3.027     -0.033  -0.011    1.117     0.247
             Norway      ITSM     11.330     7.599     0.011      3.075     1.491
                              AL        2.813      7.633     -0.073     3.074   0.369***-0.07711.546***  1.524
                              BH        2.665     22.868    -0.044     3.024   0.117***-0.02111.349***  1.494
                NZ         ITSM      -0.007     0.148     0.475      5.152     -0.051
                              AL        0.112      0.148     1.188      5.147    0.760**  0.163    -0.026    -0.177
                              BH       10.997    10.709    -0.017     3.024    1.027**  0.032    -0.012    -0.083

             Portugal     ITSM      3.241      4.300     0.006      3.024     0.754
                              AL        6.132      4.288     -0.019     3.025     1.430    0.019   3.125**    0.727
                              BH       -2.541    20.258    0.007      3.019   -0.125** 0.063   3.275**    0.763

               Spain       ITSM      2.863      5.166     0.003      3.014     0.554
                              AL        9.877      5.131     0.001      3.015   1.925***-0.029   3.148*     0.610
                              BH        7.044     23.982    0.024      3.024     0.294    0.110    2.696*     0.525

             Sweden      ITSM      7.619      3.803     0.016      3.013     2.003
                              AL        7.183      3.808     -0.006     3.014     1.886   -0.066 8.091***   2.133
                              BH        1.065     20.444    -0.012     3.017   0.052*** 0.037  7.611***   2.003
           Switzerland   ITSM      1.478      3.756     0.014      3.028     0.394
                              AL        2.301      3.754     0.012      3.028     0.613   -0.033    1.555     0.414
                              BH        1.539     17.389    -0.026     3.024     0.088    0.042     1.464     0.390
                UK         ITSM      2.412      4.372     0.010      3.018     0.552
                              AL        0.206      4.375     0.016      3.018     0.047   -0.078    2.428     0.557
                              BH        0.548     18.214    -0.003     3.024     0.030    0.009     2.411     0.552
                US         ITSM      6.611      5.897     0.086      3.099     1.121
                              AL        0.060      5.912     -0.028     3.099    0.010** -0.107  6.617**    1.129
                              BH        7.618     19.425    -0.032     3.045     0.392   -0.045  6.716**    1.140

           Thistablepresentstheperformanceofintradaytime-seriesmomentum(i.e. ITSM)alongwith
          two benchmark strategies, Always-long (i.e.AL) and Buy-and-hold (i.e.BH), for each of the 16
          equity markets using data based on local currencies.  ITSM opens a long (short) position
          at the beginning of the last half hour if the return during the ﬁrst half hour on the same
          trading day is positive (negative), and closes the positions at the market close. The Always-
          long strategy takes always a long position in the last half hour every trading day and the
          Buy-and-hold strategy holds the asset from the beginning until the end of the sample period.
          The Table reports the Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness, Kurtosis and the Sharpe
          ratio for each strategy and market.  The table also presents the correlation (ρ) between the
          ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns.  Theα and appraisal ratio (ARatio) are based
          on the regression:rI,t =α+βrbenchmark,t +ϵt, whererI,t andrbenchmark,t are returns
          from ITSM and benchmark strategies, respectively. The appraisal ratio is computed asα/σϵ
          whereσϵ is the standard error of the regression.  Standard errors are adjusted usingNewey
          andWest(1987).WetestthehypothesisthattheSharperatiosoftheITSMandtheALorBH
          strategies are equal followingLedoit and Wolf(2008).  We use Newey-West (1987) standard
          errors for the statistical signiﬁcance of alpha.  Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness,
          Kurtosis, Sharpe ratio, andα’s are annualized. *, **, and *** denote signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%,
          and 1% conﬁdence levels, respectively. The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29
          December 2017.










                                                                    59
60
61
62