Intraday time series momentum: global 
evidence and links to market 
characteristics 
Article 
Accepted Version 
Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 4.0 
Li, Z., Sakkas, A. and Urquhart, A. ORCID: 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8834-4243 (2022) Intraday time 
series momentum: global evidence and links to market 
characteristics. Journal of Financial Markets, 57. 100619. 
ISSN 1386-4181 doi: 10.1016/j.finmar.2021.100619 Available 
at https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/95566/ 
It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the 
work.  See Guidance on citing   .
To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2021.100619 
Publisher: Elsevier 
All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, 
including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other 
copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in 
the End User Agreement   . 
www.reading.ac.uk/centaur    

CentAUR 
Central Archive at the University of Reading 
Reading’s research outputs online

Intraday Time Series Momentum: International Evidence
Zeming Lia,∗, Athanasios Sakkasb, Andrew Urquhart c
aSouthampton Business School, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
email: zeming.li@soton.ac.uk
bNottingham University Business School, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
email: athanasios.sakkas@nottingham.ac.uk
cICMA Centre, Henley Business School, University of Reading, Reading, UK
email: a.j.urquhart@icmacentre.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper provides the ﬁrst study of intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) in a global
setting. By studying 16 developed markets, we show that ITSM is both economically and
statistically signiﬁcant around the world. Although global commonality across individual
markets is limited, stronger regional commonality is observed. We also ﬁnd that the US
ﬁrst half-hour return exhibits cross-country intraday predictability which is economically
exploitable. A global equally-weighted ITSM portfolio generates signiﬁcant alphas against
global equity factors and a time-varying factor manifests as a major contributor. Finally,
market micro-characteristics like liquidity provision and information continuity are shown to
be associated with ITSM.
Keywords: High frequency trading, Intraday, International markets, Momentum
JEL classiﬁcation: G11, G14, G15, G17
∗Corresponding author.
1
1. Introduction
In the asset return predictability literature, momentum is a well-known phenomenon
in ﬁnancial markets and suggests that assets that perform well in the past continue to
perform well in the future. Since the seminal work by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the
eﬀect has been well established and attracted signiﬁcant interest from both academics and
practitioners. For example, Chan et al. (1996), Hong and Stein (1999), Moskowitz and
Grinblatt (1999), Jegadeesh and Titman (2001), George and Hwang (2004), Barroso and
Santa-Clara (2015), and Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) examine momentum in the cross-
section of US stock returns both empirically and theoretically, while Griﬃn et al. (2003),
Liu et al. (2011), Menkhoﬀ et al. (2012), Fama and French (2012), and Asness et al. (2013)
provide international evidence in a broader collection of asset classes. Moreover, Moskowitz
et al. (2012) reveal a momentum eﬀect in the time-series of asset returns, that has also been
extensively studied in a variety of asset classes and factors both in- and outside of the US
(Georgopoulou and Wang (2016), Goyal and Wahal (2015), Gupta and Kelly (2019), Ham
et al. (2019), He and Li (2015), Huang et al. (2019), Hurst et al. (2017), Kim et al. (2016),
Lim et al. (2018), and Moskowitz et al. (2012)).
While most forms of momentum are studied at monthly, weakly, or daily frequency
settings, the rise of technology has led to a substantial increase in high-frequency trading
(HFT). As noted by Malceniece et al. (2019), the scale of HFT activity varies depending on
the market and how broadly HFT is deﬁned, but there is no doubt that HFT accounts for a
large share of trading volume in most developed markets. The impact of HFT has changed
the way traders trade, the way markets are structured, and how liquidity and price discovery
arise (O’Hara (2015)). Therefore HFT has had a fundamental impact on markets which has
led many academic studies to start examining the trading behavior of ﬁnancial markets at
a much higher frequency (Brogaard et al. (2014), Chaboud et al. (2014), and Hendershott
and Riordan (2013)).
In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst cross-country study on intraday momentum based
on the work of Gao et al. (2018). Gao et al. (2018), analyzing US ETFs, provide strong
evidence of intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) that the ﬁrst half-hour return of the
trading day signiﬁcantly predicts the last half-hour return. We show that this ITSM is
2
economically and statistically signiﬁcant in the international stock markets. However, we
ﬁnd that the pervasiveness of the eﬀect does not necessarily translate into a strong global
common risk factor, leaving space for constructing global intraday time-series momentum
(GITSM) portfolios that provide economic gains on top of individual country ITSM portfo-
lios. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the US ﬁrst half-hour return possesses strong predictability on
the last half-hour returns of international markets and that this cross-country predictability
is economically exploitable. In addition, we identify a time varying component that largely
explains the proﬁtability of the GITSM. We also ﬁnd that ITSM is strongly associated with
certain market micro-characteristics such as liquidity provision and information absorption.
Our research contributes to the existing literature in ﬁve ways. Firstly, we conﬁrm
both the economic and statistical signiﬁcance of the intraday momentum eﬀect across global
markets. Speciﬁcally, we follow the standard predictive regression approach in Gao et al.
(2018) and regress the last half-hour return against the ﬁrst half-hour return on each of the 16
developed markets in our sample, respectively. Our results reveal signiﬁcant predictability of
the ﬁrst half-hour return to the last half-hour return in 12 out of 16 markets. This intraday
predictability is also conﬁrmed in various market conditions. We also perform a thorough
out-of-sample (OOS) evaluation, of which the results imply signiﬁcant OOS forecasting power
(of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the last half-hour return) in most countries.
To further assess the economic signiﬁcance of the strong predictability shown in the
statistical analysis, we follow Gao et al. (2018) and compare the performance of a simple
market timing ITSM strategy with that of two passive investment strategies: always-long
that repeatedly takes long position in the last half-hour everyday andbuy-and-hold that holds
a long position throughout the whole sample period. Individual country ITSM strategies
generate signiﬁcant alphas ranging between 2.66% and 7.45% (2.60% and 7.28%) per year
when regressed against the always-long (buy-and-hold) strategies. Collectively, our evidence
conﬁrms the eﬀect of intraday time-series momentum in the international setting and is
consistent with the US evidence found in Gao et al. (2018).
Secondly, we document a modest comovement of ITSM across equity markets that is
slightly stronger among countries that are geographically clustered. Following the method-
ology from the liquidity commonality literature (Brockman et al. (2009) and Chordia et al.
3
(2000)) along with a principal component analysis, we ﬁnd a modest comovement of ITSM
across equity markets suggesting the existence of a common global factor that can only ex-
plain a small proportion of the variation in global ITSM. On the other hand, repeating the
principal component analysis with geographically grouped data implies relatively stronger
regional commonality.
Thirdly, we show that the US ﬁrst half-hour return exhibits cross-country intraday pre-
dictability. Rapach et al. (2013) document the leading predictive role of the US market on
its international counterparts at monthly frequency. It is then natural to examine whether
this cross-country predictability of the US market holds at intraday level. We tackle this
issue by regressing the last half-hour return of the international markets against the US
ﬁrst half-hour return. With the local ﬁrst half-hour return included as a control variable,
the US ﬁrst half-hour return manifests statistically strong predictability in more than half
of the markets; and the predictive R2 (adjusted) increases in all but one of the countries
after the inclusion of the US returns. Our analysis therefore implies that the cross-country
predictability of the US market in Rapach et al. (2013) exists even at intraday level.
Fourthly, we ﬁnd that investing in ITSM globally produces signiﬁcant economic gains
than investing individually. We propose three types of GITSM portfolios that are based on
individual ITSM, regional equally-weighted ITSM, and the US ﬁrst half-hour return signal.
For each type of GITSM, we adopt six portfolio weighting schemes: equally-weighted, value-
weighted, inverse variance (Kirby and Ostdiek (2012)), maximum-diversiﬁcation (Choueifaty
and Coignard (2008)), mean-variance, and minimum-variance, resulting in total 18 global
portfolios. Eleven out of the 18 portfolios yield a Sharpe ratio that is greater than one,
ranging from 1.01 to 1.77. Most strategies yield remarkable positive spanning alphas when
regressed against individual ITSM strategies, implying that the global intraday momentum
strategies subsume the country individual ones and provide considerable economic gains.
In contrast, when we regress individual ITSM against the global portfolios, only Norway
persistently exhibits positive and signiﬁcant alphas. It is worth noting that among the three
types of GITSM proposed, the one based on the US intraday ﬁrst half hour return signal is
the strongest.
We further ﬁnd that the global ITSM portfolio returns cannot be explained by global
4
equity factors, generating signiﬁcant alphas of nearly 3%. But where do these alphas come
from? Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018) show that the time-series momentum of Moskowitz et al.
(2012) incorporates a time-varying market factor that is responsible for the out-performance
of the former with respect to the cross-sectional momentum of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993).
Consistent with Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018), we identify a time-varying global investment
factor which constitutes a signiﬁcant source of the strategy proﬁtability. We show that
this time-varying factor explains around 73% of the variation of the global portfolio return
and emanates from market timing rather than stock index picking ability, attributed to the
positive autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and the last hour returns in the global market.
Finally, we show that ITSM is closely related to certain market micro-characteristics
such as liquidity provision and information digestion process. Gao et al. (2018) assert that
the ITSM eﬀect is originated from the overnight information accumulation and suggest two
possible explanations. The ﬁrst explanation is the infrequent trading behavior of investors
that has been documented both empirically and theoretically in the literature (Bogousslavsky
(2016), Duﬃe (2010), Heston et al. (2010), and Rakowski and Wang (2009)). The model
by Bogousslavsky (2016) suggests that the infrequent traders who absorb a liquidity shock
by taking sub-optimal position will have the intention to unload the sub-optimal position at
the next active period, causing another liquidity shock that is in the same direction as the
original one. Based on this model, we hypothesize that ITSM has association with market
liquidity provision. The rationale is that when the market is illiquid (liquid), both the original
and the second liquidity shocks should have larger market impact causing stronger (weaker)
price movements in the same direction. We test this hypothesis by grouping individual ITSM
based on the Corwin and Schultz (2012) liquidity measure computed from the ﬁrst half hour,
and evaluate equally-weighted ITSM across groups. The second explanation given by Gao
et al. (2018) is the existence of traders who are slow in receiving or processing information.
We relate this suggested justiﬁcation to the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ hypothesis of Da et al. (2014),
wherein investor under-react to the information that is slowly incorporated into the price
and over-react to the information that comes as a surprise. Therefore, our second hypothesis
is that ITSM is stronger when the overnight information is digested smoothly and weaker
when the market reacts swiftly with strong emotion. Similar to testing the ﬁrst hypothesis,
5
we group individual ITSM by ‘information discreteness’ (ID) that is introduced by Da et al.
(2014), and evaluate the equally-weighted portfolios across groups. Our empirical analysis
supports both hypotheses.
Our paper is also related to recent academic studies addressing intraday return pre-
dictability and ﬁnancial market microstructure from a cross-sectional perspective. For ex-
ample, Lou et al. (2019) relate ﬁrm-level intraday momentum and overnight reversal to
investor heterogeneity. Xu (2017) uses intraday predictability for long-term portfolio con-
struction while Fishe et al. (2019) study the relationship between anticipatory traders and
high-frequency momentum trading. While these studies mainly focus on the cross-sectional
predictability of US stocks or commodity future market returns, our work adds to the liter-
ature on the time-series of international stock return intraday predictability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section
3 examines the pervasiveness of intraday time-series momentum around the world both
statistically and economically. Section 4 investigates the commonality among individual
ITSM portfolios and explores the cross-country predictability of the US market. Section 5
evaluates the economic meaningfulness of investing ITSM globally. Section ?? proposes two
hypotheses and studies ITSM with two market micro-characteristics. Section 7 concludes.
2. Data and Intraday Returns
2.1. Data
We collect 1-minutely quote data from the Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH)
database of stock market indices 1 and restrict our analysis to developed markets classiﬁed
by the MSCI.2,3 We restrict our analysis to developed markets since intraday data are very
illiquid in emerging and frontier markets. The dataset provides information on stock market
indices based on the local currency, and consists of information on trading time, open price,
1Country-speciﬁc ETFs are available; however they lack liquidity and a long enough history to provide
a robust study.
2For a detailed description of this database please refer to Fong et al. (2017).
3We classify the developed countries following the MSCI market classiﬁcation guide https://www.msci.
com/market-cap-weighted-indexes.
6
high price, low price and last price for every trading minute.
In order to process the high-frequency dataset, we broadly follow the data-cleaning steps
outlined in Barndorﬀ-Nielson et al. (2009) and Hollstein et al. (2019), with a few additions.
First, we exclude Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Israel and Italy since TRTH does not provide
liquid data for these countries for a long enough period for our study. 4 Second, we use only
data with a time-stamp during the exchange trading hours for that market. For instance,
we use data for the US market between 9:30AM and 4:00PM Eastern Standard Time and in
Table 1 we report all market trading hours for each market studied. 5 Third, we remove all
non-trading days and recording errors. To be more speciﬁc, we ﬁlter out extreme prices that
are higher (lower) than 1.2 (0.8) of the highest (lowest) daily price over the sample period,
recorded on Thomson Reuters Datastream.
Finally, in order to study the economic signiﬁcance of ITSM in a portfolio setting, we
take the perspective of US dollar investor, and hence we convert all local currency data into
US dollars. 6 Speciﬁcally, we convert index prices based on the contemporaneous 1-minute
exchange rate. We exclude Hong Kong and Singapore from our sample due to the lack of
1-minutely foreign exchange data. Of the 16 remaining MSCI developed countries, data from
Sweden starts 4th October 2005 and therefore we take that as our start date for all countries
and the end date is 29th December 2017, thereby capturing over 12 years’ worth of data.
Table 1 tabulates the list of the 16 developed stock market indices employed in this study
along with their RICs and trading hours.
[Table 1 about here.]
4For these countries, there are many missing values throughout the sample and even aggregating to the
30-minute frequency still leaves many missing values.
5For some countries, the trading records do not correspond to the trading hours, and exceed market
closing time with observations that remain unchanged. This is mostly pronounced over the early period of
our sample. To address this issue we use the timestamp of the ﬁrst observation on a day as opening time
and the timestamp of the last actively changed observation as closing time.
6Though some scholars argue that using US dollar as the common numeraire might generate misleading
conclusions on return predictability (Jordan et al. (2015)), our approach is consistent with Lawrenz and Zorn
(2017) and the evidence reported in Table B.1 and B.2 of Appendix B shows stronger intraday time-series
momentum eﬀect when using local currency.
7
2.2. Calculation of the ﬁrst and last half-hour returns
Following Heston et al. (2010), Komarov (2017) and Gao et al. (2018) among others, we
divide each trading day into 30-minute non-overlapping intervals. Gao et al. (2018) show
that the length of the intervals does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect intraday time-series momentum
since most news and announcements are released overnight; hence, investors need a short
time period to digest the information after (before) the markets open (close). In this study,
we focus only on the ﬁrst and the last half-hour returns due to the heterogeneity of the
market setting across countries. 7 The ﬁrst and last half-hour returns are deﬁned as follows:
rF
t = pfirst30,t
pclose,t−1
− 1, r L
t = pclose,t
plast30,t
− 1, (1)
whererF
t denotes the ﬁrst half-hour return on day t,pfirst30,t stands for the last price in the
ﬁrst 30 minutes after market open on day t, pclose,t−1 is the closing price on day t− 1, rL
t
is the last half-hour return on day t, plast30,t is the ﬁrst price in the last 30 minutes before
market close on day t, and pclose,t is the closing price on day t. Note that for the calculation
of the ﬁrst half-hour return we also take the overnight information into account.
[Table 2 about here.]
Table 2 presents summary statistics of the annualized ﬁrst and last half-hour returns and
reports the number of days, mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis. Excluding
Spain and Sweden, the mean return for all markets in the ﬁrst half hour is substantially higher
and more volatile than in the last half hour. The high return during the ﬁrst half hour may
reﬂect the incorporation of overnight information in stock returns, while the high variability
of the ﬁrst half-hour returns may reﬂect the discrepancy in understanding this overnight
information. The low variability in the last half-hour returns indicates less disagreement on
the pricing of stocks. This is consistent with the hypothesis that traders who trade in the
morning are more informative and have stronger information processing power while those
who trade in the last half hour are followers who have less access to the information and are
7For instance, New York Stock Exchange operates continuously from 09:30 to 16:00 whereas Tokyo Stock
Exchange trades from 09:00 to 15:00 with one hour lunch break from 11:30 to 12:30.
8
less informative as a result (Barclay and Hendershott (2003) and Gao et al. (2018)). Most of
the returns have a slightly negative skewness with a kurtosis around 3, indicating that these
intraday returns are not as non-normal as found with daily returns.
3. Intraday Return Predictability Around the World
3.1. Estimating the relation between ﬁrst and last half-hour returns
We start our analysis by investigating the in–sample predictability of the ﬁrst half hour
on the last half-hour return in the 16 individual equity market indices respectively. To do
so, we follow Gao et al. (2018) and run the following predictive regression for each market :
rL
t =α +βFrF
t +ϵt, t = 1,··· ,T, (2)
whererL
t andrF
t stand for the last and the ﬁrst half-hour returns at time t, respectively and
T is the total number of trading days in the sample.
Table 3 tabulates the in–sample estimation results of the predictive regression shown in
Equation (2) for each equity market, over the full sample period (Panel A) and over a set of
diﬀerent periods such as the ﬁnancial crisis (Panel B), non-crisis period (Panel C), recession
(Panel D), and expansion (Panel E). 8 The last row in Panels A, B and C of Table 3 shows
the results from a pooled regression where we run a panel model with country dummies,
clustering the standard errors by country. This model allows for the observations of same
country at diﬀerent time points to be correlated, and to control for the heteroskedastisity
and autocorrelation We also adjust the standard errors using the Newey and West (1987)
correction modiﬁed for a panel framework.
Over the 2005–2017 period (Panel A) our empirical evidence suggests that 12 out of 16
countries exhibit a statistically signiﬁcant in–sample predictability of the ﬁrst half hour on the
8We follow Gao et al. (2018) and set the ﬁnancial crisis period from 2 nd Dec 2007 to 30 th June
2009 while the OECD recession and expansion indicators are sourced from FRED St. Louis: https:
//fred.stlouisfed.org/. Note that the methodology for computing OECD expansion/recession indica-
tors diﬀerentiates from the methodology by NBER eﬀective from January 2009. Full-sample analysis results
based on local currency are reported in Table B.1 of Appendix B.
9
last half-hour return.9 Among them, nine markets have statistically signiﬁcant positive slope
coeﬃcients at the 1% level. When all 16 markets are pooled we ﬁnd a positive and statistically
signiﬁcant relation between the ﬁrst and the last half-hour returns. The coeﬃcient of the ﬁrst
half-hour return is 2.86 and statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero (t-statistic 7.53).
Collectively, we provide strong evidence that the ﬁrst half-hour return positively forecasts
the last half-hour return. This relationship is pervasive across countries and it is consistent
with the evidence found in the US stock market (Gao et al. (2018)).
[Table 3 about here.]
3.2. Intraday time-series momentum under various conditions
We now investigate the relation between the ﬁrst and last half-hour returns under various
market conditions, i.e. during the ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial crisis periods and the business
cycle. Panels B and C of Table 3 show that the predictability of the ﬁrst half hour on the last
half-hour return is economically stronger during the ﬁnancial crisis compared to the non–
crisis period; 12 out of 16 markets exhibit larger slope coeﬃcients during ﬁnancial crisis, while
the magnitude of adjusted R2s is much larger compared to the one in the non-crisis period.
Amongst the 16 markets, the predictive power of the ﬁrst half hour is more pronounced in
the US stock market which has a (scaled) coeﬃcient of the ﬁrst half hour equal to 18.28
during the ﬁnancial crisis, four times larger than the corresponding one observed when we
exclude the ﬁnancial crisis period from our full sample period (the coeﬃcient is equal to
4.28). In the pooled regression we ﬁnd a stronger positive relation between the ﬁrst and the
last half-hour returns during the ﬁnancial crisis period relative to the non-crisis period; the
coeﬃcients of the ﬁrst half-hour returns are 3.71 and 2.09, for the ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
crisis periods, respectively. Note that both coeﬃcients are statistically distinguishable from
zero. Similarly, the adjusted R2 is equal to 1.18% during ﬁnancial crisis; this is almost two
9Gao et al. (2018) document an R2 equal to 1.6% and argue that the level is considered impressive and
relatively large compared to other predictors, especially at this data frequency. In our empirical analysis,
4 out 12 equity markets exhibit an adjusted R2 above 1.6%. The large proportion of the markets showing
strong positive signiﬁcance is rather striking and may imply intraday time-series momentum exists not only
on the US market but across the world.
10
times larger than the one observed in the non-crisis period (i.e. 0.63%). Panels D and E
show that the predictive ability of the ﬁrst half hour on the last half-hour return is stronger
during recessions compared to expansions, with an average slope and adjusted R2 equal to
4.05 (2.52) and 1.72% (0.81%) for the recession (expansion) periods. 10 The ITSM exhibits
larger slope coeﬃcients in 12 out of 16 markets during recession compared to expansion
periods.
Collectively, Table 3 provides strong evidence that the positive relation between the ﬁrst
half hour and the last half-hour return is more pronounced during the ﬁnancial crisis and
recession periods. Our ﬁndings extend the evidence shown in Gao et al. (2018) for the US
stock market to a comprehensive set of countries around the world.
3.3. Out–of–sample predictability
Up to this point, we have examined the in-sample predictability of the ﬁrst on the last
half-hour return, which was based on the entire sample period. In this section, we formally
examine the out-of-sample (OOS) predictive power of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the last
half-hour return for each individual stock market index. This enables us to assess the pa-
rameter instability over time in the predictive regressions (Ashley et al. (1980) and Welch
and Goyal (2008)).
Based on an expanding window approach, we use the ﬁrst ﬁve years (2005-2010) of our
sample as the initial estimation period and recursively regress Equation 2 on each market by
adding one day at a time. Then we evaluate the OOS performance of our predictive model
by comparing it with that of a simple historical mean model via four statistics. 11
The ﬁrst statistic is the Campbell and Thompson (2008) out-of-sample R2 calculated as
10Note that since the recession and expansion periods are country-speciﬁc, we restrict our empirical
analysis to individual predictive regressions and do not run a pooled regression.
11Goyal and Welch (2003) and Welch and Goyal (2008) show it is diﬃcult for a predictive model to
outperform the historical mean model in an out-of-sample setting.
11
follows:12
R2
OOS = 1−
∑T
t=1(rL
t − ˆrL
t )2
∑T
t=1(rL
t − ¯rL
t )2
, (3)
where T is the number of observations in the out-of-sample period, rL
t is the realized value
of the last half-hour return at time t, ¯rL
t is the value estimated by using historical mean
of the last half-hour return with data until time t− 1, and ˆrL
t is the estimated value from
the predictive regression using information available up to time t− 1. A positive value of
the R2
OOS implies that the predictive model (equation 2) outperforms the historical mean
model.13
While theR2
OOS is commonly used in the literature (Ferreira and Santa-Clara (2011), Gao
et al. (2018), Neely et al. (2014), and Rapach et al. (2010)), Campbell and Thompson (2008)
argue that perverse estimates in the recursive regressions can be easily generated due to short
estimation period and thus add no value in practice. In our case, a negative slope estimation
would not help someone make an out-of-sample investment decision if they believe that the
theoretical relation between the ﬁrst and the last half-hour returns is positive. In addition,
one would not follow the trading signal generated by the predictive regression if the forecast
return in the last half hour next day is negative. To examine the OOS predictability in a more
realistic setting, we follow Campbell and Thompson (2008) and compute the constrained R2
as our second statistic, denoted asRst.R2
OOS. The Rst.R2
OOS imposes two restrictions on the
R2
OOS. In particular, we ﬁrst set the slope coeﬃcient to zero whenever its estimated value
is negative, then set ˆrL
t to zero if it is negative. Similar to its unconstrained counterpart, a
positive value ofRst.R2
OOS indicates superior OOS performance of the predictive model over
12This statistic essentially compares the Mean Squared Prediction Error (MSPE) of our predictive model
with that of the historical mean model. Welch and Goyal (2008) employ a similar statistic with adjustment
for degree-of-freedom. Since we have only one predictor and a relatively large sample size with high data
frequency, the eﬀect of degree-of-freedom adjustment would be trivial.
13In a ﬁnite sample and under the null that the predictor does not help prediction, Clark and West
(2006) state that the predictive model should have larger MSPE due to the noise caused by estimating
extra parameters, resulting in a negative R2
OOS. In contrast, a positive R2
OOS implies smaller MSPE of the
predictive model compared to that of the historical mean model, thus indicating out-of-sample predictability
of the predictor.
12
that of the historical mean model.
We then test the null hypothesis that the MSPE of the historical mean model is equal or
less than that of the predictive model (equivalent to H0: R2
OOS≤ 0 against H1: R2
OOS > 0).
In order to do so, we use the Clark and West (2007) MSPE −adjusted.14 To calculate the
statistic, we ﬁrst compute a time series of ˆft as follows:
ˆft = (rL
t − ¯rL
t )2− [(rL
t − ˆrL
t )2− (¯rL
t − ˆrL
t )2], (4)
and then regress ˆft against a constant. The Clark and West (2007) MSPE −adjusted is
the one-sided (upper-tail) student-t statistic of the constant term. We also apply the Newey
and West (1987) corrections to this t-statistic.
Furthermore, we investigate whether the historical mean model forecasts encompass the
predictive model forecasts. This gives us a sense of whether the latter provides useful informa-
tion in prediction relative to the former.15 To this end, we conduct an forecast encompassing
test that is valid for nested models, using ENCNEW proposed by Clark and McCracken
(2001).16 The null hypothesis is that the forecasts of the historical mean model encompass
those of the predictive model; the one-sided (upper-tail) alternative hypothesis is that the
forecasts of the historical mean model do not encompass those of the predictive model:
ENCNEW =
∑T
t=1[(rL
t − ¯rL
t )2− (rL
t − ˆrL
t )(rL
t − ¯rL
t )]
T−1∑T
t=1(rL
t − ˆrL
t )2
. (5)
Table 4 tabulates the four OOS statistics along with the average recursive regression
coeﬃcients for each country. As shown in the table, the average slope coeﬃcient is positive
14The MSPE −adjusted is an adjusted version of the Diebold and Mariano (2002) and West (1996)
statistic that is used to test the MSPE hypothesis in a non-nested setting. Clark and McCracken (2001)
and McCracken (2007) point out that the Diebold and Mariano (2002) and West (1996) statistic has a
nonstandard distribution when used for nested models, like in our case. Clark and West (2007) show the
MSPE −adjusted has an approximately standard normal asymptotic distribution when used for comparing
nested models, leading to valid inferences.
15For a textbook discussion of forecast encompassing, see Clements and Hendry (1998).
16This statistic is also employed by Barroso and Maio (2019) and Rapach and Wohar (2006) among others.
Since its asymptotic distribution is nonstandard, we use the critical values given by Clark and McCracken
(2001). That is, we use 1.280 and 2.085 for 5% and 10% conﬁdence levels, respectively.
13
for all countries. Five out of 16 countries exhibit positive R2
OOS, while 10 show positive
Rst.R2
OOS.17 Although only ﬁve markets give positive R2
OOS, the Clark and West (2007)
MSPE−adjusted rejects the null (R2
OOS≤ 0) in 10 markets. This interesting result suggests
that a negative R2
OOS (or/and Rst.R2
OOS) does not necessarily imply complete denial of the
OOS predictability of the ﬁrst half-hour return. If we take the example of the Japanese
market, both R2
OOS andRst.R2
OOS are shown negative, yet this gives a signiﬁcant MSPE −
adjusted at the 1% conﬁdence level, indicating that the MSPEs for the predictive model are
signiﬁcantly less than that of the historical mean model in this market. 18 The last column
of Table 4 reports results of the forecast encompassing test. The null (the historical mean
forecasts encompass the predictive forecasts) is rejected in 14 out of 16 countries, implying
that the ﬁrst half-hour return does provide additional predictive information relative to a
simple historical mean of the last half-hour return in thoes markets. Overall, our OOS
analysis furnishes strong evidence of OOS predictability of the ﬁrst half-hour return on the
last hour-hour return in most countries.
[Table 4 about here.]
3.4. Economic signiﬁcance
The statistical performance demonstrated in the previous subsection does not necessarily
translate into economic beneﬁts from an investment perspective. 19 Kandel and Stambaugh
(1996) show that variables with relatively weak statistical predictive power can still produce
17Most estimated slope coeﬃcients steadily remained positive in the recursive regressions, making the
eﬀect of the sign restriction trivial. It is the forecast restriction that contributes most to the improvement
in the Rst.R2
OOS performance.
18In a study of technical indicator predictability, Neely et al. (2014) ﬁnd similar results and argue, in
Footnote 21, that this is plausible when comparing nested models. For further discussions, see Clark and
West (2007) and McCracken (2007).
19Cenesizoglu and Timmermann (2012) compare the economic and statistical performance of 60 return
prediction models and ﬁnd weak evidence of a close relationship between economic and statistical perfor-
mances. They argue that this is due to the fact that statistical measures generally focus on the accuracy of
mean prediction whereas the focal point of economic measures is whether the model can predict movements
of the whole return distribution associated with the weights given by the utility function.
14
signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts in a portfolio context. We now examine the economic value of
the ITSM in each of the 16 stock markets and compare the proﬁtability of the country ITSM
strategy with two passive country strategies – namely the Always-long and Buy-and-hold –
as in Gao et al. (2018).
For the ITSM strategy we consider the sign of the ﬁrst half-hour return as the trad-
ing/timing signal – i.e. if the ﬁrst half-hour yields a positive return, we take a long position
in the last half-hour on the same day; if the ﬁrst half-hour yields a negative return, we take a
short position in the last half-hour on the same day. We close all the positions at the market
close everyday. The market timing strategy can be summarized as follows:
rI,t =



rL
t, if rF
t > 0;
−rL
t, if rF
t ≤ 0,
(6)
whererI,t is the market timing return of ITSM on day t and,rF
t andrL
t are the ﬁrst and last
half-hour return at time t, respectively.
The Always-long strategy takes an always-long position at the beginning of the last half-
hour and a closing position at the market close. The Buy-and-hold strategy is a passive
strategy which takes a long position of the equity index at the beginning of the sample
period, and holds the index until the end of the period.
[Table 5 about here.]
Table 5 tabulates the mean, standard deviation (SD), skewness, kurtosis and the Sharpe
ratio of the intraday time-series momentum (i.e. ITSM) and the two benchmark strategies,
Always-long and Buy-and-hold, for each of the 16 equity markets as well as the correlation
(ρ) between the ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns.20 The alpha (α) and Appraisal
Ratio (ARatio) are based on the following regression:
rI,t =α +βrbenchmark,t +ϵt, (7)
20We conduct the same analysis using data based on local currencies and report the results in Table B.2
of Appendix B.
15
where rI,t and rbenchmark,t stand for the returns from ITSM and benchmark strategies, re-
spectively. The appraisal ratio is calculated as α/σϵ where σϵ is the standard error of the
regression. Standard errors are adjusted using the Newey and West (1987) correction. We
test the hypothesis that the Sharpe ratios of the ITSM and the Always-long or Buy-and-
hold strategies are equal following the HAC inference method proposed by Ledoit and Wolf
(2008).21
Table 5 shows that ITSM exhibits positive return over the 2005-2017 period across mar-
kets. The volatility of the ITSM strategy is lower compared to the Always-long and Buy-
and-hold strategies in seven and 16 out of 16 markets, respectively. ITSM has a positive
skewness in 10 out of 16 markets suggesting low crash risk while the ITSM and the passive
strategies appear to be unrelated (i.e. the correlation between ITSM and the benchmark
strategy returns is close to 0). Finally, the ITSM strategy possesses higher Sharpe ratios
compared to Always-long and Buy-and-hold strategies in eight and 14 out of 16 markets,
respectively, albeit not statistically signiﬁcant in all cases. ITSM has positive statistically
signiﬁcant (at the 1% level in most cases) alphas in 10 out of 16 countries, ranging be-
tween 2.66% (for the UK) and 7.45% (for Norway) per annum when regressed against the
Always-long strategy, and between 2.60% (for the UK) and 7.28% (for Norway) per annum
when regressed against Buy-and-hold strategy. Similarly, among countries giving signiﬁcant
alphas, the annualized appraisal ratios range between 0.52 (for UK) and 0.99 (for Norway)
when regressed against the Always-long strategy and between 0.51 (for the UK) and 0.97
(for Norway) when regressed against the Buy-and-hold strategy.
4. Cross-country Relationship of Intraday Time-series Momentum
4.1. Global and regional commonality
Given the pervasiveness of ITSM portfolio proﬁtability shown in the previous sections,
the question that arises is whether these portfolios are global, regional, or country-speciﬁc.
If these portfolios are mainly driven by common global factors, there would not be any diﬀer-
21The R code used in this study is available on Wolf’s website: \https://www.econ.uzh.ch/en/people/
faculty/wolf/publications.html#9.
16
ence for a US investor to invest in the US ITSM strategy or in a global strategy that combines
the country ITSM portfolios. Accordingly, a global ITSM momentum diversiﬁcation strat-
egy should also perform similarly to a local ITSM strategy, which involves an investment
in the individual country ITSM strategies. In contrast, if the local ITSM portfolios contain
sizable country-speciﬁc or regional components, these country ITSM strategies would allow
the investor to expand their investment opportunity set signiﬁcantly beyond what can be
achieved by the country ITSM portfolios alone. Using the methodology in Brockman et al.
(2009) and the principal component analysis (PCA), we address this question both globally
and regionally.
We compute the correlation coeﬃcients between country momentum portfolios. Table 6
shows that the correlation coeﬃcients between most countries are close to zero. However,
we observe larger correlations between countries that are geographically closer, compared to
the coeﬃcients between countries across regions. For example, the coeﬃcients between the
UK and most European countries are signiﬁcantly larger than those between the UK and
other countries. We discuss in more detail this regional relationship in ITSM later in this
subsection.
[Table 6 about here.]
To investigate the commonality in ITSM, we ﬁrst test for potential common variation
across the country individual ITSM portfolios. We follow the methodology adopted by
Chordia et al. (2000) and Brockman et al. (2009) in their studies on commonality in market
liquidity, and run the following time series regression:
rI,i,t =αi +βtrI,g,t +βt+1rI,g,t+1 +βt−1rI,g,t−1 +ϵi,t, (8)
where rI,i,t is the ITSM return in country i at time t, rI,g,t is the contemporaneous equally-
weighted ITSM return based on the country ITSMs excluding countryi,rI,g,t+1 is the equally-
weighted ITSM return based on the country ITSMs excluding countryi att+1, andrI,g,t−1 is
the equally-weighted ITSM return based on the country ITSMs excluding countryi att−1.22
The inclusion of the control variables rI,g,t+1 and rI,g,t−1 eliminates the lag eﬀect induced
22Both studies of Chordia et al. (2000) and Brockman et al. (2009) employ the percentage change of the
17
by the time diﬀerence issue. A positive and signiﬁcant contemporaneous slope coeﬃcient
βt indicates inﬂuence of the globe-level ITSM returns on rI,i,t, while the magnitude of the
adjusted R2 of Equation (8) measures the strength of such inﬂuence.
Panel A of Table 7 shows that the country ITSMs are inﬂuenced by the globe-level ITSM.
Theβts are statistically signiﬁcant in 12 out of 16 markets and the average coeﬃcient has a
magnitude of 73.79 (scaled by 100) (see the last row of Table 7). However, the adjusted R2s
show the strength of such inﬂuence varies from country to country. Apart from Switzerland,
the adjusted R2s for most European countries are relatively large ranging from 12.39%
(Austria) to 52% (France), whereas that of the rest countries are fairly low ranging from
0.43% (US market) to 2.62% (Austria). The signiﬁcant contemporaneous slope coeﬃcients
together with the disagreement in the adjusted R2s imply that only part of the expected
return in each country intraday momentum is captured by a common global component and
stronger regional commonality may exist, consistent with the previous correlation analysis.
[Table 7 about here.]
Asness et al. (2013) employ the principal component analysis (PCA) to the returns of
value and momentum portfolios across asset classes and ﬁnd a global commonality in value
and momentum strategies. We carry out a PCA in the individual ITSM market timing
return series, which are normalized and standardized to eliminate the eﬀect of idiosyncratic
characteristics in each market. Panel A of Figure 1 depicts the variance explained by each
component. The ﬁrst principal component (PC1) accounts only for 27.7% of the covariance
matrix of the ITSM returns. 23 Panels B to D in Figure 1 plot the front view, top view, and
liquidity measures to study the co-movement of liquidity and to avoid econometric issues, e.g., nonstationar-
ity. In our case, we are interested more in commonality in the ITSM across countries than the co-movement
of the returns. In addition, as we are analyzing strategy returns, it is less likely to encounter the potential
econometric issues faced in their studies.
23One concern with our approach is the 16 markets are non-synchronized, i.e. they have diﬀerent operating
periods, leading to possible underestimation of commonality. In order to account for this issue, we repeat
our principal component analysis with monthly aggregated ITSM returns and the conclusion remains largely
unchanged. Results can be found in Appendix C. In the following regional commonality analysis, we also
group countries based on the geographical location, further alleviate the non-synchronized issue.
18
end view of the rotated data plotted in a 3-D space of which the axes are the ﬁrst, second,
and third principal components (PC1, PC2, and PC3), respectively. These plots visualize
the relation between the variance of returns of ITSM in each market and the ﬁrst three PCs.
Speciﬁcally, we plot the rotated data using the scores on PC1, PC2, and PC3. Then we use
arrows to indicate the relationship between the variance of ITSM returns in each market and
the PCs. The arrows are obtained by projecting the return data into the principal component
space.24 The length and angle of the arrows show how heavily and speedily the ITSM returns
in each market respond each of the ﬁrst three principal components. The ITSM returns are
concentrated in mainly three directions that are roughly orthogonal. Firstly, all European
markets, apart from Switzerland, point to the same direction as does the PC1. Secondly,
Switzerland, the two Scandinavian countries, and all Paciﬁc countries in the sample point
roughly to the same direction that is perpendicular to the PC1. Finally, the two North
American countries point to a direction that is roughly perpendicular to the ﬁrst two PCs.
Again, consistent with both the correlation analysis and the commonality regressions shown
above, we ﬁnd weak evidence of global commonality but seemingly strong evidence of regional
commonality.
[Figure 1 about here.]
We further conﬁrm regional commonality in ITSM by applying PCA analysis to three
geographical sub-samples, namely, American countries, Asia-Paciﬁc countries, and European
countries. Figure 2 plots the ﬁrst principal components obtained from each group. Splitting
the sample geographically leads to PC1s that explain a relatively large proportion of variance
in each region. The ﬁrst principal component from the American countries explains 63.1% of
the ITSM return variance while that from the Asia-Paciﬁc and European countries explains
41.5% and 40.3% respectively.
[Figure 2 about here.]
24The rotated data are obtain by multiplying return data matrix and the component loading matrix
(rotation matrix).
19
Our empirical evidence suggests that the country ITSM strategies share a universal risk
factor. However, this factor explains only part of their variation whereas countries geograph-
ically close exhibit stronger regional risk factors, suggesting potential diversiﬁcation beneﬁts
from investing in a combined portfolio of country ITSM strategies globally.
4.2. What is the role of US?
It is known that US market may possess cross-market predictability on returns of inter-
national markets. At monthly frequency, Campbell and Hamao (1992) present evidence that
the US macroeconomic variables such as the dividend-price ratio and the short interest rate
can help predict Japanese stock returns. Rapach et al. (2013) show that the US stock returns
Granger cause stock returns in 11 international markets. At a higher frequency, Becker et al.
(1990) state the daily open-to-close US stock return can predict that of the Japanese stock
market on the next day.
It is therefore natural to investigate the predictive role of US ﬁrst half-hour returns in
a cross-market setting. In particular, we regress the local last half-hour return of a country
(apart from US) against the immediately previous US ﬁrst half-hour return available and the
local ﬁrst half-hour return as a control variable of local ITSM. That is, for non-Asia-Paciﬁc
countries, we ﬁt the following model:
rL
local,t =α +βUSrF
US,t +βlocalrF
local,t +ϵt (9)
Where rF
local,t is the ﬁrst half-hour return of the local country on day t, rF
US,t is the ﬁrst
half-hour return from the US market on day t, and rL
local,t is the last half-hour return of the
local country on day t. For Australia, Japan, and New Zealand, whose markets close before
the US market open on the same calendar day, we use the US ﬁrst half-hour return from the
previous day:
rL
local,t =α +βUSrF
US,t−1 +βlocalrF
local,t +ϵt (10)
SigniﬁcantβUS of Equation (9) and Equation (10) imply predictability of the US ﬁrst half-
hour return on the local last half-hour return.
Panel B of Table 7 reports the results. The US ﬁrst half-hour return is found to be
associated with a positive slope coeﬃcient in 12 out of 15 international countries, while 8 of
20
the coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant. In the last column, we report the increase in the adjusted R2
by including the US ﬁrst half-hour return as an additional predictive variable, which is the
diﬀerence between the adjusted R2 of Model (9) or (10) and that of Model (2):
∆Adj.R2 =Adj.R2
cross−Adj.R2
local (11)
WhereAdj.R2
local is the adjustedR2 of Model (2), and Adj.R2
cross is the adjustedR2 of Model
(9) or (10), depending on the local country.
Using wild bootstrapped data, we also test the null hypothesis of no US ﬁrst half-hour
return predictability (H0 : βUS = 0 vs H1 : βUS > 0 or βUS < 0). In particular, we take
Equation (9) and Equation (10) as benchmark predictive regressions and, given the research
on intraday return persistence (Heston et al. (2010) and Lou et al. (2019)), we assume that
the US ﬁrst half-hour return follows a ﬁrst order autoregressive process:
rF
US,t =δ +θrF
US,t−1 +vt (12)
where vt is a white noise. We therefore simulate alternative data under the null hypothesis:
∗rL
local,t = ˆα + ˆβlocalrF
local,t + ˆϵtwt (13)
∗rF
US,t = ˆδ + ˆθ∗rF
US,t−1 + ˆvtwt (14)
where ˆα, ˆβlocal, and ˆϵt are estimated from the benchmark equations; ˆδ, ˆθ, and ˆvt are estimated
from Equation (12); wt is randomly generated from the standard normal distribution; ∗rF
US,0
is set to be equal to rF
US,0. We multiply both residual terms with the same random scalar
to preserve the contemporaneous correlation between the local ﬁrst half-hour return and the
US ﬁrst-half hour return and to maintain the conditional heteroskedastisity structure in the
error terms (Rapach et al. (2013)).
We then collect the Newey and West (1987) t-statistic of βUS from the benchmark equa-
tions (either one of them depending on the local country) with the bootstrapped data:
∗rL
local,t =α +βUS
∗rF
US,t +βlocalrF
local,t +ϵt (15)
∗rL
local,t =α +βUS
∗rF
US,t−1 +βlocalrF
local,t +ϵt (16)
21
Repeating the above process 2000 times leads to 2000 t-statistics, from which the p-value
is computed as the proportion of the bootstrapped t-statistics that have a larger absolute
value than the t-statistic obtained from the benchmark equations.
As shown in Panel B of Table 7, we reject the null of no US cross-market predictability
at 10% level in 10 out of 16 markets, implying a strong leading role of the US market at
intraday frequency.
5. Investing In Intraday Time-series Momentum Globally
5.1. Beneﬁts from diversiﬁcation
To exploit the potential diversiﬁcation beneﬁts in ITSM discussed in the previous sub-
section, we study three types of global intraday time-series momentum strategies (GITSM).
We consider a (1) GITSM based on individual ITSM, (2) GITSM based on regional ITSM,
(3) GITSM using the signal from US ﬁrst half hour return. For each type of GITSM, we
employ six portfolio construction techniques using equal, value, inverse-variance (Kirby and
Ostdiek (2012)), maximum-diversiﬁcation (Choueifaty and Coignard (2008)), mean-variance
and minimum-variance weights.
For Type (1) GITSM, we ﬁrst obtain individual ITSM return series by simply go long
in the last half hour of a country equity index if the ﬁrst half-hour return on that index is
positive and go short if negative. Then, we calculate the realized GITSM returns based on
the above mentioned techniques.25
25Although our sample consists of major stock indices across the globe and each stock market opens
at diﬀerent time, we do not suﬀer from the time diﬀerence issue when constructing the global portfolios.
Geographically, the market that opens the earliest in our sample is the New Zealand market (GMT+12)
while the US market is the latest (GMT-4). The time diﬀerence between Wellington and New York is 16
hours; that is, when the US market closes at New York time 4pm, the local time for the New Zealand market
is 8am next day, which is two hours prior to the New Zealand market open. In practice, at the US market
close on dayt, a fund manager will have the last half-hour return for all the countries in sample on day t and
be able to make decisions on the weights for day t + 1. At this time, the local time for the earliest-opened
market, New Zealand market, is 8am on day t + 1, which is several hours prior to its last half hour on day
t + 1. Therefore, a daily global portfolio is realistic in practice without suﬀering from time diﬀerence issues.
22
For Type (2) GITSM, the base assets are regional ITSM instead of individual ITSM. That
is, we average ITSM returns across American countries, Asia-Paciﬁc countries, and Europe
countries to get three regional ITSM return series before we construct GITSM portfolios
accordingly.
For Type (3) GITSM, the base return series are generated by trading in the last half
hour of each market guided by the signal from the US ﬁrst-half return. If the US ﬁrst-hour
return is positive (rF
US > 0) on day t, we go long in the last half hour on each market and
vice versa if rF
US < 0.
We use the ﬁrst ﬁve years in the sample as the initial estimation period for the construc-
tion of the inverse-variance, maximum-diversiﬁcation, mean-variance and minimum-variance
portfolios. More speciﬁcally, we compute the weights based on information from the period
4th October 2005 to 1st October 2010, and invest from 4th October 2010 until the end of
the sample period. 26 We compute the weights recursively by adding one day a time in the
light of estimation stability of such expanding window approach. 27 Finally, we impose the
constraints that assure the sum of weights is equally to one and short sales are not allowed.
Table 8 evaluates the three types of GITSM. Panel A reports the mean, standard devia-
tion (SD), skewness, kurtosis, and Sharpe ratio of the global intraday time-series momentum
under the diﬀerent weighting schemes for each type. Panel B tabulates the alphas from
the spanning regressions of global intraday momentum on country (individual) intraday
momentum, while Panel C presents the alphas from the spanning regressions of country
(individual) intraday momentum portfolios on global intraday momentum; Newey and West
(1987) t-statistics are shown in parenthesis.
Over the 2005-2017 period, the annualized returns of the value-weighted GITSM (VW-
GITSM) are generally higher than that of the equally-weighted GITSM (EW-GITSM) (4.75%
vs 3.06%, 2.71% vs 2.78%, and 5.71% vs 5.17%). However, the VW-GITSM also has a higher
volatility (3.22%, 2.41%, and 3.51%) for all types of GITSM compared to the volatility of
the EW-GITSM (2.43%, 2.01% and 2.93%). The Sharpe ratio of the EW-GITSM is lower
261st October 2010 is a Friday and 4th October is the following Monday.
27Indeed, we also present results based on a rolling window approach in Table B.3 of Appendix B, the
results do not change radically.
23
than that of the VW-GITSM for Type (1) GTISM while higher for both Type (2) and (3).
The spanning alphas of the EW- and VW-GITSM on the country individual ITSM are
considerably large and positive and are statistically signiﬁcant at 1% level in all cases but
for Type (2) VW-GITSM against US-ITSM. The signiﬁcant alphas range from 1.40% to
4.76% and 1.58% to 5.58% per annum for the EW- and VW-GITSM, respectively (Panel
B). In the reverse regression on the country ITSM portfolios on the global EW and VW
intraday momentum, we document no statistically signiﬁcant alphas or even negative and
statistically signiﬁcant alphas for most countries with Norway being the only country that
consistently gives positive and signiﬁcant alphas. Our evidence suggests that the global
portfolios subsume the individual country ITSM portfolios.
The remaining GITSM portfolios perform inconsistently across the three types of GITSM.
The inverse-variance GITSM (IV-GITSM) yeilds lower average returns than the EW-GITSM
and VW-GITSM do, yet gives positive and signiﬁcant spanning alphas when against all in-
dividual ITSM for Type (2) and most of ITSM for Type (3). The maximum-diversiﬁcation
GITSM (MD-GITSM) gives larger returns than does the IV-GITSM in Type (1) and (3)
GITSM, and exhibits positive and signiﬁcant spanning alphas in when against most indi-
vidual ITSM. Despite of the relatively weak economic signiﬁcance of mean-variance GITSM
(MV-GITSM) in Type (1) and (2) GITSM, the MV-GITSM of Type (3) GITSM manifests
itself as the strongest strategy in our evaluation, with an annualized return of 6.75% and
remarkable spanning alphas ranging from 5.63% to 7.19%.
Finally, the minimum-variance GITSM (MinV-GITSM) exhibits signiﬁcant spanning al-
phas in only Type (2) GITSM. We also document that the GITSM portfolios exhibit higher
Sharpe Ratios compared to country individual ones. Over the 2005-2017 period the annual-
ized Sharpe ratios of the EW-GITSM are 1.26, 1.38, and 1.77 for all types and that of the
VW-GITSM are 1.48, 1.12 and 1.63. In contrast, the Sharpe ratios of the country ITSM
range between -0.40 and 1.12 over the same period.
Overall, our analysis shows investing ITSM globally produces signiﬁcant economic gain
and the global intraday momentum subsumes the country intraday momentum, but not the
opposite.
[Table 8 about here.]
24
5.2. Factor exposure of GITSM and the source of its proﬁtability
Taking the equally-weighted GITSM of Type (1) as an example, we further study the
factor exposure of GITSM. 28 In particular, we deﬁne the global intraday momentum return
as the equally-weighted 16 country ITSM portfolio return in excess of the 1-month T-bill
rate, and regress it against the global market factor (CAPM), global Fama-French 3-factor
model (FF3), global Fama-French 3-factor model plus the (cross-sectional) momentum factor
(FF3+MOM), global Fama-French 5-factor model (FF5), and global Fama-French 5-factor
model plus the momentum factor (FF5+MOM). 29
Panel A of Table 9 tabulates the results from these regressions. The results show that
the loadings of the GITSM on the global equity factors are insigniﬁcant, while we docu-
ment statistically signiﬁcant and positive alphas varying between 2.90% (FF3) and 2.97%
(FF5) across the models, highlighting that the proﬁtability of the global intraday time-series
momentum strategy is not captured by global equity factors.
[Table 9 about here.]
So where does the proﬁtability of GTISM come from? Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018) com-
pare the performance of time-series momentum (Moskowitz et al. (2012)) and cross-sectional
momentum (Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)), and conclude that the out-performance of the
time-series momentum is largely due to a time-varying factor that is implicitly incorporated
into the strategy. More speciﬁcally, they claim that the dollar value invested in the long leg
and the short leg in the time-series momentum is not identical and varies over time, while
cross-sectional momentum is a purely zero-cost strategy. This emanates from the fact that
the time-series momentum holds long position in assets with buy signal and short position
in assets with sell signal, while the number of assets with buy and sell signals varies over
time.
28From now, we use words ‘Type (1) EW-GITSM’ and ‘GITSM’ interchangeably.
29The global factors are sourced from French Library, i.e. http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/
faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. The global factors are constructed from developed markets and
represent the global stock market.
25
While our GITSM based on the intraday time-series momentum introduced by Gao et al.
(2018) diﬀers from the time-series momentum by Moskowitz et al. (2012), it does possess
similar construction features. For instance, suppose on a given dayt that 10 of the 16 country
equity indices in our sample generate positive trading signals and the remaining six generate
negative trading signals. In this case, the wealth we invest on day t in the long leg is by
construction higher than that in the short leg. The reason is we are equally weighting all
the 16 indices across the long and short legs rather than weighting within the long and short
portfolios separately. As a result, our global intraday time-series momentum incorporates a
time-varying net position, which is the diﬀerence in the wealth invested in each leg. 30
Therefore, we examine the contribution of this time-varying factor to the proﬁtability of
GITSM. To do so we ﬁrst compute this factor following the approach in Goyal and Jegadeesh
(2018). To be speciﬁc, we invest, in total, two dollar value into the GITSM and invest the
net position into the global market. Considering the previous example where we had 10
indices exhibiting positive signal and six indices exhibiting negative signal, the dollar value
we invest in the long leg in this case is 10
16× $2 = $1.25, and the dollar value we invest in the
short leg is 6
16×$2 = $0.75, hence we end up with a net long position of $1.25−$0.75 = $0.5
in the countries that possess positive trading signals. Because the unconditional probability
of an asset return being positive/negative is 0.5, the net position between the long and short
legs on average invests on the whole market, which is the equally-weighted ITSM across the
16 indices employed in our study. Therefore, the time-varying global factor is deﬁned as
follows:
TVC t =EWMt×NPM t, (17)
where EWMt is the equally-weighted last half-hour return across the 16 country indices –
i.e. EWMt = 1
16×∑16
i=1rL
i,t, where rL
i,t stands for the last half hour of country i at time
t, and NPM t denotes the net position in the global market at time t – i.e. NPM t =
(Nlong
t −Nshort
t )× 2. Nlong
t (Nshort
t ) is the number of indices in the long (short) leg. It is
worth noting that while EWMt and NPM t are on the same day, our construction of TVC t
30Technically, this time-varying net position can be either net long or net short depending on the number
of stock indices in the long and short legs.
26
is ex-ante. This is because NPM t is computed from the ﬁrst half hour of day t whereas
EWMt is the equally-weighted global market in the last half hour of day t.
Next, we regress GITSM × 2 against Fama-French factors with TVC included on the
right hand side as follows:
GITSM t× 2 =α + β′Ft +TVC t +ϵt, (18)
where β is a vector of slope coeﬃcients and Ft is a vector of Fama-French pricing factors at
timet. Multiplying GITSM by two ensures that the total value invested in the strategy is $2
and will not aﬀect the signiﬁcance of coeﬃcients. Panel B in Table 9 reports the regression
results. Consistent with Panel A, GITSM does not show signiﬁcant exposures to the Fama-
French factors. However, the inclusion of the time-varying factor eliminates the signiﬁcant
and positive alpha as shown in Panel A and the slope coeﬃcients of TVC are signiﬁcant
at the 1% conﬁdence level in all cases. Moreover, the adjusted R2s increase from 0.4% to
around 73%. Our results suggest that the time-varying factor is a signiﬁcant source of the
GITSM proﬁtability and can explain around 73% of the variation of the global time-series
momentum.
To further understand the sources of TVC returns, we follow Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018)
and decompose the time-varying factor into two terms as follows:
TVC t =NPM t×EWMt +cov(NPM t,EWM t) (19)
where the ﬁrst term NPM t×EWMt is the expected return of the average net position, and
is referred to as the risk premium factor in Goyal and Jegadeesh (2018); and the second term
is the covariance between the net position in market determined by the information from the
ﬁrst half hour and the equally-weighted global market in the last half hour, and is referred
to as the market timing component. Since NPM t tend to be positive (negative) when more
markets perform strongly (poorly) in the ﬁrst half hour (e.g., an unexpected good news of
global economy might result in an uplift in many markets during the ﬁrst half hour), the
second term will add to the strategy performance when there is a positive autocorrelation
between the ﬁrst and the last half-hour return in the global market.
Over our sample period, the average net position ( NPM t) is 14.05% and the average
TVC (TVC t) is 5.40% per annum. The decomposition of TVC reveals that the return from
27
the risk premium term is 0.53% while that of the market timing component is 4.88%. The
market timing component accounts for 90.37% of the return on TVC, highlighting that the
proﬁtability of the time-varying factor is largely due to the market timing and not asset
picking ability.
6. What Drives Intraday Time-series Momentum?
6.1. Liquidity provision and market impact
Building on the slow moving capital model of Duﬃe (2010), Bogousslavsky (2016) de-
velops a theoretical framework in which there are two types of traders trade in the market:
frequent traders who trade constantly and infrequent traders who need to be inactive for a
period after each trade due to the costs of being always attentive. When liquidity trading
is transient, Bogousslavsky (2016) shows formally in his model that return autocorrelations
can switch sign, from negative to positive, as a result of the presence of infrequent traders.
Intuitively, this is due to that the infrequent traders absorb a liquidity shock by taking sub-
optimal position at time t and then unload the excess position at time t+k, causing another
liquidity shock at the same direction. 31
In the intraday context, the overnight information accumulation causes naturally tran-
sient liquidity shocks at market open. Infrequent traders, who supply liquidity with a price
concession at the open might have the intention to unload their sub-optimal positions at
a later time. Given the well-known U shape of the intraday trading volume and volatility
(Jain and Joh (1988)), the optimal timing of this unloading may be the trading period im-
mediately prior to the market close, during which the market is the deepest and most liquid
(together with the market open). 32 This unloading is therefore in the same direction as the
initial shock and causes the intraday momentum. Gao et al. (2018) conjecture this process
as a possible explanation for the ITSM.
If this explanation holds, we argue that the level of liquidity plays a vital role. In
particular, when the liquidity is low, there should be a relatively large market impact for
31k is the length of inactive period.
32Another motivation of rebalancing at the close is to avoid overnight risk (Gao et al. (2018)).
28
both the initial liquidity shock and the infrequent rebalancing at the close, so a stronger
intraday momentum would be expected. Conversely, when the liquidity is high, the market
impact of both the initial liquidity shock and the infrequent rebalancing at the close is
expected to be smaller, resulting in a weaker intraday momentum.
Hence, we hypothesize that the more illiquid the market is, the stronger return seasonality
should be observed. To test this, we sort at the end of the ﬁrst half hour of each day the
16 indices based on their estimated liquidity and then calculate the equally-weighted ITSM
return of the top, medium, and bottom 30 percents of the indices.
Due to the lack of information on intraday quotes and volume in most countries, ap-
propriately estimating the liquidity at the frequency of our data is rather challenging. The
simplest-to-compute option that does not require information on trading volume is perhaps
the measure by Roll (1984): 2
√
−cov(rt,rt−1). However, maybe due to that the informational
eﬃcient market assuption is hardly hold at intraday level, the autocovariance of minutely
returns are positive in nearly half of the days in our sample, making the adjustment for pos-
itive autocovariance informatioanlly costly. Therefore, we adopt the percent-cost High-Low
liquidity measure by Corwin and Schultz (2012) that uses only the high and low prices of
two consecutive time periods to estimate the spread. The High-Low liquidity is computed
as follows:
S = 2(eα− 1)
1 +eα
α =
√2β−√β
3− 2
√
2 −
√ γ
3− 2
√
2
β =
1∑
j=0
[
ln
(Ht+j
Lt+j
)]2
, γ =
[
ln
(Ht,t+1
Lt,t+1
)]2
,
(20)
where S stands for the High-Low liquidity measure, Ht and Lt are the high price and low
price at time t, Ht,t+1 and Lt,t+1 are the high price and the low price over two consecutive
time periods t and t + 1.
For each country, we generally follow the procedure in a note by Corwin and estimate
the spread in the ﬁrst half hour by averaging the estimates across overlapping ﬁve-minute
intervals.33 Speciﬁcally, we calculate the High-Low liquidity measure over every two consec-
33The note is given by one of the authors of Corwin and Schultz (2012), illustrating the use of the
29
utive ﬁve-minute intervals and then take the average across the overlapping intervals within
the ﬁrst half hour. 34
The ﬁrst three columns of Table 10 report the results. Panel A tabulates the equally-
weighted ITSM strategy returns (multiplied by 2) and Sharpe ratio in the low, medium and
high liquidity groups. 35 As shown in the table, we document a monotonic increase in the
EW-ITSM portfolio returns from high to low liquidity groups. Speciﬁcally, the strategy
yields almost doubled raw returns in the low liquidity group compared to the high liquidity
group. A similar pattern can also be observed in the Sharpe ratios. This is consistent with
our hypothesis discussed above.
Since we argue in the previous section that the time-varying component might be a major
contributor of the equally-weighted ITSM strategy return, we next investigate the behavior
of the time-varying component across the groups. The ﬁrst three columns of Panel B of Table
10 tabulates the time-varying factor (TVC) within each group as well as its components, i.e.
the risk premium and market timing. We do not observe a clear trend in the TVC return
across liquidity groups, leading us to investigate the factor exposure for each group. Panel
C of Table 10 tabulates the results from the regression of EW-ITSM on the Fama-French
factors within each group. For simplicity, we report only the alphas and the slope coeﬃcients
of TVC with respect to ﬁve Fama-French factors and the cross-sectional momentum factor.36
As in the previous analysis, we compare the alphas before and after the inclusion of TVC.
The signiﬁcant alphas in the regression that do not include TVC suggest the EW-ITSM
High-Low estimate in the intraday setting (http://sites.nd.edu/scorwin/files/2019/11/Application_
Intraday_Analysis.pdf).
34While we have the high and low prices for most markets at minutely level, we do not have this information
for some countries in certain periods, e.g., Ireland data gives exactly the same number for high, low, and last
prices for each minute in the early phase of our sample period. By aggregating the data up to ﬁve-minute
intervals, we mitigate this problem. Straightforwardly, we pick up the highest and the lowest price from the
high, low, and last prices collectively in a ﬁve-minute interval, regardless if we have adequate high/low price
information.
35Due to the inclusion of TVC in the Fama-French regressions later, we multiply the EW-ITSM excess
return by 2. To get the actual excess return, one just needs to divide the ﬁgures in Table 10 by 2.
36For more detailed results, including the analysis with respect to other regression models, see Table B.4
and B.5 in Appendix B.
30
return in each group cannot be fully explained by Fama-French factors. However, a rather
striking result shown in the table is that the alpha in the low liquidity group survives even
with the inclusion of TVC. This infers that the EW-ITSM portfolio return in the bottom
illiquid group is not fully captured by the time-varying factor.
[Table 10 about here.]
6.2. Information discreteness and inattentive ‘frogs’
A second explanation for the intraday time-series momentum proposed by Gao et al.
(2018) is that some traders are simply slower than others causing under-reaction to the
overnight information. Da et al. (2014) propose the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ (FIP) hypothesis in
which investors are inclined to be inattentive and under-react to gently arrived information.
This under-reaction can be adjusted later in time causing momentum. In their paper, they
document that the cross-sectional momentum is stronger when the information in the forma-
tion period is continuously arrived. A recent study by Lim et al. (2018) tests this hypothesis
on the time-series momentum of Moskowitz et al. (2012) by grouping individual US stocks
based on the information discreteness (ID), which is the measure of information arrival pro-
cess proposed by Da et al. (2014). The authors ﬁnd that the time-series momentum performs
better in the group of stocks in which the information arrives gently and continuously in the
formation period.
Therefore, in our second hypothesis we expect to observe stronger intraday momentum
in markets where information arrives continuously. Following Da et al. (2014) and Lim et al.
(2018) among others we deﬁne information discreteness (ID) as follows:
IDt =sign(rF
t )× (%negt− %post), (21)
whererF
t is the ﬁrst half-hour return on dayt, %negt and %post are the percentage of minutes
associated with a negative and positive return within the ﬁrst 30 minutes, respectively, on
dayt.
To see how ID measures information incorporation process, consider the ﬁrst half-hour
returns from two days on same market, rF
k and rF
s , triggered by equally eﬀective overnight
31
information, φO
k and φO
s , which lead to an upward price movement. 37 Now suppose φO
k is
smoothly incorporated into the price whileφO
s is absorbed by a few sudden price movements.
This can be translated into thatrF
k has a higher proportion of positive minutely returns than
does rF
s . Collectively:
φO
k =φO
s
rF
k =rF
s > 0
0≤ps <p k≤ 1,
(22)
where pk and ps are the proportion of positive minutely returns in rF
k and rF
s . Assuming
there is no zero-return minutes, we have: 38
1− 2pk =IDk <ID s = 1− 2ps, (23)
Therefore, a small ID implies that information is relatively gently absorbed while a large
ID is a sign of high degree of information discreteness.
Similar to the previous subsection, we divide the 16 indices into three groups, at the end
of the ﬁrst half hour of each day, based on the information discreteness, and then calculate
the equally-weighted last half hour ITSM returns within each group.
The last three columns of Table 10 report the results. As in the liquidity groups, we
observe a monotonic increase in the EW-ITSM portfolio returns from large to small ID
groups. The results imply that the hypothesis of Da et al. (2014) is empirically related to
our intraday time-series momentum. Panel B of Table 10 shows an increasing pattern in the
TVC that is consistent with that of the EW-ITSM across ID groups. The market timing
component takes advantage of the intraday autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and the last
half-hour returns. Thus, its increase might imply that markets in which the information
arrives continuously tend to have stronger autocorrelation between the ﬁrst and last half-
hour returns which is consistent with the FIP hypothesis by Da et al. (2014) as well as other
37In fact, so long as both φO
k and φO
s are positive, it is not necessary to assume equality. But we keep it
for simplicity.
38sign(rF
k ) =sign(rF
s ) = 1, %negk−%posk = (1−pk)−pk = 1−2pk, and %negs−%poss = (1−ps)−ps =
1− 2ps.
32
studies on the relation between investor attention and information arrival process in which
investors tend to underreact when information arrives gently (Byun et al. (2016) and Hou
et al. (2009)). Finally, Panel C of Table 10 shows that the signiﬁcant alphas in the regression
that do not include TVC become insigniﬁcant once the TVC is included.
7. Conclusion
With the rise of high-frequency trading, a growing number of academic studies are docu-
menting intraday anomalies in asset prices. The recent paper by Gao et al. (2018) introduces
intraday time-series momentum (ITSM) in which the ﬁrst half-hour return signiﬁcantly pre-
dicts the ﬁnal half-hour return in US ETFs. The current paper studies ITSM in a broader
space of 16 international stock markets, with particular attention to their cross-country
relationship, investing potential, and the association of ITSM with market characteristics.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst show that the phenomenon is both statistically and economically
pervasive around the world. Twelve out of 16 developed markets in our sample exhibit sta-
tistical evidence of intraday time-series momentum. The widely observed in-sample evidence
of the intraday return predictability is also conﬁrmed in a thorough out-of-sample analysis
in the majority of countries. We examine a simple market timing strategy based on ITSM
and we document signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts of country ITSM with respect to passive
strategies where er ﬁnd signiﬁcant and positive alphas in most countries in the spanning
regressions of the ITSM against passive strategies. Overall, our international evidence is
largely consistent with that of Gao et al. (2018) in the US market indicating that ITSM is
not a US-only eﬀect.
Having conﬁrmed ITSM globally, we then study the cross-country relationship of the
eﬀect. Particularly, we examine the existence and extent of the global and regional com-
monality across individual ITSM. Our evidence indicates that the ITSM strategy share some
commonality across countries, but the explanatory power of the global factor is weak while
relatively stronger regional factors are observed. We further investigate the leading predic-
tive role of the US ﬁrst half-hour return and ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence in 9 out of 16 markets.
Naturally, this leads to the possibility of constructing global portfolios.
By applying six commonly used portfolio construction techniques on three types of global
33
intraday time-series momentum (GITSM), we document remarkable economic gains of invest-
ing ITSM globally than individually. We show that the proﬁtability of an equally-weighted
GITSM portfolio cannot be explained by global equity factors and further decomposition
shows that a time varying factor is largely responsible for its proﬁtability.
Finally, we explore the association of ITSM with two market characteristics, liquidity
provision and information discreteness, that are closely related to the possible explanations
of the phenomenon as proposed in Gao et al. (2018). The evidence implies that the eﬀect
of ITSM tends to be stronger when the liquidity provision is limited and when there is
information continuity, which is consistent with our expectations based on the infrequent
rebalancing model of Bogousslavsky (2016) and the ‘frog-in-the-pan’ model of Da et al.
(2014).
34
References
Ashley, R.; C. W. J. Granger; and R. Schmalensee. “Advertising and Aggregate Consump-
tion: An Analysis of Causality.” Econometrica, 48 (1980), 1149–1167.
Asness, C. S.; T. J. Moskowitz; and L. H. Pedersen. “Value and Momentum Everywhere.”
Journal of Finance , 68 (2013), 929–985.
Barclay, M. J., and T. Hendershott. “Price Discovery and Trading After Hours.” Review of
Financial Studies, 16 (2003), 1041–1073.
Barndorﬀ-Nielson, O. E.; P. R. Hansen; A. Lunde; and N. Shephard. “Realized Kernels in
Pratice: Trade and Quotes.” Econometrics Journal, 12 (2009), 1–32.
Barroso, P., and P. F. Maio. “The Risk-Return Tradeoﬀ Among Equity Factors.”
Working paper, available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2909085 (2019).
Barroso, P., and P. Santa-Clara. “Momentum Has Its Moments.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 116 (2015), 111 – 120.
Becker, K. G.; J. E. Finnerty; and M. Gupta. “The Intertemporal Relation Between the
U.S. and Japanese Stock Markets.” Journal of Finance , 45 (1990), 1297–1306.
Bogousslavsky, V. “Infrequent Rebalancing, Return Autocorrelation, and Seasonality.”Jour-
nal of Finance , 71 (2016), 2967–3006.
Brockman, P.; D. Y. Chung; and C. P´ erignon. “Commonality in Liquidity: A Global Per-
spective.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 44 (2009), 851–882.
Brogaard, J.; T. Hendershott; and R. Riordan. “High-Frequency Trading and Price Discov-
ery.” Review of Financial Studies , 27 (2014), 2267–2306.
Byun, S. J.; S. S. Lim; and S. H. Yun. “Continuing Overreaction and Stock Return Pre-
dictability.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 51 (2016), 2015–2046.
35
Campbell, J. Y., and Y. Hamao. “Predictable Stock Returns in the United States and Japan:
A Study of Long-Term Capital Market Integration.” Journal of Finance, 47 (1992), 43–69.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. B. Thompson. “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample:
Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?” Review of Financial Studies , 21 (2008),
1509–1531.
Cenesizoglu, T., and A. Timmermann. “Do Return Prediction Models Add Economic
Value?” Journal of Banking & Finance , 36 (2012), 2974–2987.
Chaboud, A. P.; B. Chiquoine; E. Hjalmarsson; and C. Vega. “Rise of the Machines: Al-
gorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market.” Journal of Finance , 69 (2014),
2045–2084.
Chan, L. K. C.; N. Jegadeesh; and J. Lakonishok. “Momentum Strategies.” Journal of
Finance, 51 (1996), 1681–1713.
Chordia, T.; R. Roll; and A. Subrahmanyam. “Commonality in Liquidity.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 56 (2000), 3–28.
Choueifaty, Y., and Y. Coignard. “Toward Maximum Diversiﬁcation.” Journal of Portfolio
Management, 35 (2008), 40–51.
Clark, T. E., and M. W. McCracken. “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encompassing
for Nested Models.” Journal of Econometrics , 105 (2001), 85–110.
Clark, T. E., and K. D. West. “Using Out-of-sample Mean Squared Prediction Errors to Test
the Martingale Diﬀerence Hypothesis.” Journal of Econometrics , 135 (2006), 155–186.
Clark, T. E., and K. D. West. “Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Predictive Accuracy
in Nested Models.” Journal of Econometrics , 138 (2007), 291–311.
Clements, M., and D. Hendry. Forecasting Economic Time Series . Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK (1998).
Corwin, S. A., and P. Schultz. “A Simple Way to Estimate Bid-Ask Spreads from Daily
High and Low Prices.” Journal of Finance , 67 (2012), 719–760.
36
Cumming, D.; L. Helge Haß; and D. Schweizer. “Strategic Asset Allocation and the Role of
Alternative Investments.” European Financial Management, 20 (2014), 521–547.
Da, Z.; U. G. Gurun; and M. Warachka. “Frog in the Pan: Continuous Information and
Momentum.” Review of Financial Studies , 27 (2014), 2171–2218.
Daniel, K., and T. J. Moskowitz. “Momentum Crashes.” Journal of Financial Economics ,
122 (2016), 221–247.
Diebold, F. X., and R. S. Mariano. “Comparing Predictive Accuracy.” Journal of Business
& Economic Statistics , 20 (2002), 134–144.
Duﬃe, D. “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital.” Journal
of Finance, 65 (2010), 1237–1267.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French. “Size, Value, and Momentum in International Stock Returns.”
Journal of Financial Economics , 105 (2012), 457–472.
Ferreira, M. A., and P. Santa-Clara. “Forecasting Stock Market Returns: The Sum of the
Parts is More Than the Whole.” Journal of Financial Economics , 100 (2011), 514–537.
Fishe, R. P. H.; R. Haynes; and E. Onur. “Anticipatory Traders and Trading Speed.”Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 54 (2019), 729–758.
Fong, K. Y. L.; C. A. Trzcinka; and C. W. Holden. “What Are the Best Liquidity Proxies
for Global Research?” Review of Finance, 21 (2017), 1355–1401.
Gao, L.; Y. Han; S. Z. Li; and G. Zhou. “Market Intraday Momentum.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 129 (2018), 394–414.
George, T. J., and C.-Y. Hwang. “The 52-week High and Momentum Investing.” Journal
of Finance, 59 (2004), 2145–2176.
Georgopoulou, A., and J. G. Wang. “The Trend Is Your Friend: Time-Series Momentum
Strategies across Equity and Commodity Markets.” Review of Finance, 21 (2016), 1557–
1592.
37
Goyal, A., and N. Jegadeesh. “Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Tests of Return Predictabil-
ity: What Is the Diﬀerence?” Review of Financial Studies , 31 (2018), 1784–1824.
Goyal, A., and S. Wahal. “Is Momentum an Echo?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 50 (2015), 1237–1267.
Goyal, A., and I. Welch. “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios.” Manage-
ment Science, 49 (2003), 639–654.
Griﬃn, J. M.; X. Ji; and J. S. Martin. “Momentum Investing and Business Cycle Risk:
Evidence from Pole to Pole.” Journal of Finance , 58 (2003), 2515–2547.
Gupta, T., and B. Kelly. “Factor Momentum Everywhere.” Journal of Portfolio Manage-
ment, 45 (2019), 13–36.
Ham, H.; H. Cho; H. Kim; and D. Ryu. “Time-series Momentum in China’s Commodity
Futures Market.” Journal of Futures Markets , 39 (2019), 1515–1528.
He, X.-Z., and K. Li. “Proﬁtability of Time Series Momentum.” Journal of Banking &
Finance, 53 (2015), 140 – 157.
Hendershott, T., and R. Riordan. “Algorithmic Trading and the Market for Liquidity.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 48 (2013), 1001–1024.
Heston, S. L.; R. A. Korajczyk; and R. Sadka. “Intraday Patterns in the Cross-section of
Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance , 65 (2010), 1369–1407.
Hollstein, F.; M. Prokopczuk; and C. W. Simen. “The Conditional CAPM Revisited: Evi-
dence from High-Frequency Betas.” Management Science, Forthcoming.
Hong, H., and J. C. Stein. “A Uniﬁed Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and
Overreaction in Asset Markets.” Journal of Finance , 54 (1999), 2143–2184.
Hou, K.; W. Xiong; and L. Peng. “A Tale of Two Anomalies: The Implications of Investor
Attention for Price and Earnings Momentum.” Working paper, available at https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=976394 (2009).
38
Huang, D.; J. Li; L. Wang; and G. Zhou. “Time Series Momentum: Is It There?” Journal
of Financial Economics , Forthcoming.
Hurst, B.; Y. H. Ooi; and L. H. Pedersen. “A Century of Evidence on Trend-Following
Investing.” Journal of Portfolio Management , 44 (2017), 15–29.
Jain, P. C., and G.-H. Joh. “The Dependence between Hourly Prices and Trading Volume.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 23 (1988), 269–283.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications
for Stock Market Eﬃciency.” Journal of Finance , 48 (1993), 65–91.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. “Proﬁtability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of
Alternative Explanations.” Journal of Finance , 56 (2001), 699–720.
Jordan, S. J.; A. Vivian; and M. E. Wohar. “Location, Location, Location: Currency Eﬀects
and Return Predictability?” Applied Economics, 47 (2015), 1883–1898.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh. “On the Predictability of Stock Returns: An Asset-
Allocation Perspective.” Journal of Finance , 51 (1996), 385–424.
Kim, A. Y.; Y. Tse; and J. K. Wald. “Time Series Momentum and Volatility Scaling.”
Journal of Financial Markets , 30 (2016), 103–124.
Kirby, C., and B. Ostdiek. “It’s All in the Timing: Simple Active Portfolio Strategies that
Outperform Na¨ ıve Diversiﬁcation.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 47
(2012), 437–467.
Komarov, O. “Intra-day Momentum.” Working paper, available at https://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2905713 (2017).
Lawrenz, J., and J. Zorn. “Predicting International Stock Returns with Conditional Price-
to-fundamental Ratios.” Journal of Empirical Finance , 43 (2017), 159 – 184.
Ledoit, O., and M. Wolf. “Robust Performance Hypothesis Testing With the Sharpe Ratio.”
Journal of Empirical Finance , 15 (2008), 850–859.
39
Lim, B. Y.; J. Wang; and Y. Yao. “Time-series Momentum in Nearly 100 Years of Stock
Returns.” Journal of Banking & Finance , 97 (2018), 283–296.
Liu, M.; Q. Liu; and T. Ma. “The 52-week High Momentum Strategy in International Stock
Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance , 30 (2011), 180–204.
Lou, D.; C. Polk; and S. Skouras. “A Tug of War: Overnight Versus Intraday Expected
Returns.” Journal of Financial Economics , 134 (2019), 192 – 213.
Malceniece, L.; K. Malcenieks; and T. J. Putni¸ nˇ s. “High Frequency Trading and Comovement
in Financial Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics , Forthcoming.
McCracken, M. W. “Asymptotics for Out of Sample Tests of Granger Causality.” Journal
of Econometrics, 140 (2007), 719–752.
Menkhoﬀ, L., L. Sarno; M. Schmeling; and A. Schrimpf. “Currency Momentum Strategies.”
Journal of Financial Economics , 106 (2012), 660–684.
Moskowitz, T. J., and M. Grinblatt. “Do Industries Explain Momentum?” Journal of
Finance, 54 (1999), 1249–1290.
Moskowitz, T. J.; Y. H. Ooi; and L. H. Pedersen. “Time Series Momentum.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 104 (2012), 228–250.
Neely, C. J.; D. E. Rapach; J. Tu; and G. Zhou. “Forecasting the Equity Risk Premium:
The Role of Technical Indicators.” Management Science, 60 (2014), 1772–1791.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Deﬁnite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica, 55 (1987), 703–708.
O’Hara, M. “High Frequency Market Microstructure.” Journal of Financial Economics , 116
(2015), 257–270.
Rakowski, D., and X. Wang. “The Dynamics of Short-term Mutual Fund Flows and Re-
turns: A Time-series and Cross-sectional Investigation.” Journal of Banking & Finance ,
33 (2009), 2102 – 2109.
40
Rapach, D. E.; J. K. Strauss; and G. Zhou. “Out-of-Sample Equity Premium Prediction:
Combination Forecasts and Links to the Real Economy.” Review of Financial Studies , 23
(2010), 821–862.
Rapach, D. E.; J. K. Strauss; and G. Zhou. “International Stock Return Predictability:
What Is the Role of the United States?” Journal of Finance , 68 (2013), 1633–1662.
Rapach, D. E., and M. E. Wohar. “In-sample vs. Out-of-sample Tests of Stock Return
Predictability in the Context of Data Mining.” Journal of Empirical Finance , 13 (2006),
231–247.
Roll, R. “A Simple Implicit Measure of the Eﬀective Bid-Ask Spread in an Eﬃcient Market.”
The Journal of Finance , 39 (1984), 1127–1139.
Welch, I., and A. Goyal. “A Comprehensive Look at The Empirical Performance of Equity
Premium Prediction.” Review of Financial Studies , 21 (2008), 1455–1508.
West, K. D. “Asymptotic Inference about Predictive Ability.” Econometrica, 64 (1996),
1067–1084.
Xu, H. “Reversal, Momentum and Intraday Returns.” Working paper, available at https:
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2991183 (2017).
41
Appendix A. Annualizing Moments
We use the rescaling technique similar to Appendix B in Cumming et al. (2014) to
annualize daily mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis. Suppose ri is the daily
return on dayi andR is the annual return. Under the assumption that there are 252 trading
days in a year and the ris are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), it is clear
that the annualized mean ¯R = ¯r· 252 and the annualized standard deviation σR =σr·
√
252.
Therefore, the annualized Skewness Skew(R) is:
Skew(R) = E(R− ¯R)3
σ3
R
= E(∑252
i=1ri− 252¯r)3
252
√
252σ3
r
= E[∑252
i=1(ri− ¯r)]3
252
√
252σ3
r
=
∑252
i=1
∑252
j=1
∑252
k=1E[(ri− ¯r)(rj− ¯r)(rk− ¯r)]
252
√
252σ3
r
=
∑252
i=1Skew(ri)σ3
r
252
√
252σ3
r
= Skew(ri)√
252 ,
where
E[(ri− ¯r)(rj− ¯r)(rk− ¯r)]
=



E[(ri− ¯r)3] =Skew(ri)σ3
r, if i =j =k;
0 otherwise .
42
and the annualized Kurtosis Kurt(R) is:
Kurt(R) = E(R− ¯R)4
σ4
R
= E(∑252
i=1ri− 252¯r)4
2522σ4
r
= E[∑252
i=1(ri− ¯r)]4
2522σ4
r
=
∑252
i=1
∑252
j=1
∑252
k=1
∑252
l=1E[(ri− ¯r)(rj− ¯r)(rk− ¯r)(rl− ¯r)]
2522σ4
r
=
∑252
i=1Kurt(ri)σ4
r + 252·251
2 · 4·3
2 σ4
r
2522σ4
r
= Kurt(ri)
252 + 251
84 ,
where
E[(ri− ¯r)(rj− ¯r)(rk− ¯r)(rl− ¯r)]
=



E[(ri− ¯r)4] =Kurt(ri)σ4
r, if i =j =k =l;
E[(ri− ¯r)2(rj− ¯r)2] =σ4
r, if respective two of i,j,k,l are equal;
0 otherwise .
43
Appendix B. Additional Tables
[Table B.1 about here.]
[Table B.2 about here.]
[Table B.3 about here.]
[Table B.4 about here.]
[Table B.5 about here.]
Appendix C. Principal Component Analysis With Monthly Aggregated ITSM
Returns
[Figure C.1 about here.]
44
Figures
Panel A: Variance Explained Panel B: Front View
Panel C: Top View Panel D: End View
Figure 1: Global Principal Component Analysis
Plotted are the results of global principal component analysis. Panel A depicts the proportional eigenvalues
associated with each eigenvector. It shows how much variance is explained by each principal component.
The proportional values (in percentage) are stated above the bars. Panel B to D are the front view, top
view, and end view of the rotated data plotted in a 3-D space of which the axes are the PC1, PC2, and PC3
respectively. Each point represents a rotated observation whereas the arrows are the projection of original
return series onto the new principal component space, implying the relation of the series and the PCs. Data
are normalized and standardized and the sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
45
Figure 2: Regional First Principal Components
Plotted are the ﬁrst principal components obtained from the regional principal component analysis which is
applied to three geographical sub-samples, namely, American countries (Amer), Asia-Paciﬁc countries (A-P),
and European countries (EU). Data are normalized and standardized and the sample period spans from 04
October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
46
Figure C.1: Principal Component Analysis With Monthly Aggregated ITSM Returns
Plotted are the proportional eigenvalues associated with each eigenvector obtained from the principal com-
ponent analysis on monthly aggregated ITSM returns. It shows how much variance is explained by each
principal component. The proportional values (in percentage) are stated above the bars. Data are normalized
and standardized and the sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
47
Tables
Table 1: Indices
Index RIC T rading Hours (local time)
Australia S&P ASX 200 .AXJO 10:00 - 16:00
Austria Austrian Traded Index .ATX 09:00 - 17:30
Canada S&P/TSX Composite Index .GSPTSE 09:30 - 16:00
France CAC 40 Stock Market Index .FCHI 09:00 - 17:30
Germany DAX PERFORMANCE-INDEX .GDAXI 09:00 - 17:30
Ireland ISEQ Overall Index .ISEQ 08:00 - 16:30
Japan Nikkei Stock Average 225 .N225 09:00 - 15:00
Netherlands AEX Amsterdam Index .AEX 09:00 - 17:30
New Zealand NZX 50 Index Gross .NZ50 10:00 - 18:00
Norway Oslo Exchange All-share Index .OSEAX 09:00 - 16:30
Portugal PSI 20 INDEX .PSI20 08:00 - 16:30
Spain Ibex 35 Index .IBEX 09:00 - 17:30
Sweden OMX Stockholm All-share Index .OMXSPI 09:00 - 17:30
Switzerland SMI Index .SSMI 09:00 - 17:30
United Kingdom FTSE 100 .FTSE 08:00 - 16:30
United States S&P500 .SPX 09:30 - 16:00
This table presents the 16 developed markets based on the MSCI classiﬁcation list along with their
corresponding stock market indices. RIC stands for the Reuters Instrument Code.
48
Table 2: Summary Statistics of the First and Last Half-hour Returns
No.Days Mean (%) SD (%) Skewness Kurtosis
Australia First 3104 7.826 22.508 -0.009 3.028
Last 3104 5.105 5.866 -0.042 3.068
Austria First 3050 22.191 19.346 0.007 3.067
Last 3050 15.379 6.714 0.108 3.093
Canada First 3073 8.538 11.345 0.029 3.067
Last 3073 4.185 4.586 -0.007 3.135
France First 3136 8.995 16.940 -0.023 3.053
Last 3136 3.363 5.821 -0.006 3.023
Germany First 3110 12.817 16.504 -0.036 3.042
Last 3110 3.357 5.457 0.016 3.047
Ireland First 3102 21.124 18.074 0.113 3.236
Last 3102 6.557 6.646 0.027 3.070
Japan First 3003 18.465 25.601 -0.011 3.021
Last 3003 1.838 6.093 0.041 3.120
Netherlands First 3134 12.490 15.879 -0.020 3.048
Last 3134 2.459 5.363 -0.023 3.028
Norway First 3075 20.800 12.765 -0.023 3.025
Last 3075 4.453 7.491 -0.013 3.046
NZ First 3078 3.153 16.875 -0.005 3.045
Last 3078 1.289 1.549 0.038 3.034
Portugal First 3134 16.246 15.676 -0.029 3.060
Last 3134 8.974 5.177 -0.026 3.019
Spain First 3124 5.731 17.656 -0.023 3.067
Last 3124 11.022 5.651 -0.011 3.019
Sweden First 3076 0.342 11.977 -0.014 3.020
Last 3076 7.634 4.391 -0.016 3.021
Switzerland First 3079 11.001 12.806 0.020 3.045
Last 3079 -2.272 5.276 -0.019 3.035
UK First 3102 9.201 15.108 -0.061 3.087
Last 3102 1.733 5.211 0.020 3.024
US First 3082 2.867 11.343 -0.022 3.023
Last 3082 0.697 5.850 -0.013 3.094
This table reports the summary statistics for the ﬁrst and last half-hour returns of the
16 developed equity market indices. The ﬁrst and last half-hour returns are deﬁned
in equation 1. The table reports the number of days (i.e. No.Days), mean, standard
deviation (i.e. SD), skewness, and kurtosis for each equity market index. The sample
period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017. Note that the number of
available trading days varies from country to country due to diﬀerent holiday systems
and data availability limitations. The mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis
are annualized. For the calculation of the annualized third and fourth moments see
Appendix A.
49
Table 3: Predictability and Market Conditions
Intercept β F Adj.R2
(%)
Intercept β F Adj.R2
(%)
Intercept β F Adj.R2
(%)
Intercept β F Adj.R2
(%)
Intercept β F Adj.R2
(%)
Panel A: Panel B: Panel C: Panel D: Panel E:
F ull Sample Financial Crisis Excluding Financial Crisis Recession Expansion
Australia 4.69*** 3.98*** 2.31 13.33* 4.76** 3.01 3.54*** 3.37*** 1.69 5.97*** 3.48*** 1.70 2.50 5.06*** 3.88
(3.22) (4.05) (1.91) (2.26) (2.65) (3.94) (3.08) (2.62) (1.12) (3.63)
Austria 15.22*** 1.13 0.07 34.77*** 0.36 -0.25 12.25*** 1.69** 0.22 21.15*** 1.21 0.02 11.80*** 1.09 0.06
(6.68) (0.84) (3.09) (0.13) (6.59) (2.39) (4.62) (0.49) (5.19) (1.30)
Canada 4.28*** -0.71 0.00 14.64* 2.62 0.06 2.99*** -3.03*** 0.73 8.38*** 0.52 -0.06 1.36 -3.08** 0.62
( 3.00) (-0.46) (1.83) (0.87) ( 2.73) (-3.05) (3.15) (0.25) ( 0.97) (-2.40)
France 2.96 4.83*** 1.94 10.51 7.81*** 5.91 2.13 3.03*** 0.67 6.57** 5.15*** 2.53 0.50 4.29*** 1.17
(1.63) (4.87) (1.32) (3.96) (1.25) (3.41) (1.97) (3.76) (0.26) (3.38)
Germany 2.97* 2.97*** 0.78 -0.56 5.14** 2.41 3.76** 1.63* 0.19 3.33 3.46** 1.04 2.91 2.32** 0.42
(1.74) (3.25) (-0.07) ( 2.44) (2.32) (1.91) (1.01) (2.26) (1.58) (2.30)
Ireland 6.24*** 1.18 0.07 -3.12 -0.25 -0.25 7.27*** 2.76** 0.37 6.08** -0.16 -0.06 4.98 6.72*** 1.65
(3.04) (1.28) (-0.34) (-0.18) (3.63) (2.52) ( 2.16) (-0.17) (1.62) (4.38)
Japan 1.06 4.14*** 2.97 7.22 7.40*** 8.88 0.65 2.32*** 0.94 0.00 5.94*** 5.98 2.39 1.93*** 0.61
(0.72) (4.07) (1.05) (3.71) (0.44) (2.89) (0.00) (3.85) (1.21) (2.74)
Netherlands 2.16 4.04*** 1.42 4.90 7.97*** 5.71 2.23 1.24 0.09 6.07 5.61*** 2.83 1.17 2.32** 0.40
(1.33) (3.77) (0.65) (4.16) (1.53) (1.51) (1.45) (3.34) (0.75) (2.24)
Norway 3.26 5.44*** 0.83 -2.81 8.09* 0.94 4.29** 4.18*** 0.67 3.60 7.21*** 1.07 2.92 3.19** 0.44
(1.55) (3.40) (-0.23) ( 1.95) (2.48) (3.47) (1.00) (2.74) (1.27) (2.42)
NZ 1.42*** 0.08 -0.03 -0.24 -0.28 -0.14 1.65*** 0.33 0.07 1.33** 0.01 -0.06 1.52** 0.22 -0.03
(3.03) (0.25) (-0.12) (-0.43) (3.73) (1.37) (1.97) (0.02) (2.51) (0.64)
Portugal 8.62*** 2.21** 0.42 10.59 3.78** 1.28 8.49*** 1.45 0.14 10.92*** 1.86 0.19 7.70*** 2.54** 0.56
(5.37) (2.48) (1.56) (2.31) (5.34) (1.40) (2.72) (1.29) (4.66) (2.18)
Spain 10.80*** 3.71*** 1.31 16.70** 6.87*** 4.67 10.13*** 2.24** 0.44 17.32*** 4.27*** 1.77 7.37*** 3.09** 0.85
(6.08) (3.73) (2.24) (3.29) (6.03) (2.20) (4.83) (2.79) (4.05) (2.51)
Sweden 7.75*** 2.89** 0.59 12.24* -0.11 -0.26 6.97*** 4.47*** 1.52 10.27*** 1.99 0.20 5.62*** 4.24*** 1.41
(5.29) (2.46) ( 1.94) (-0.04) (5.31) (4.29) (4.04) (1.15) (3.58) (3.08)
Switzerland -2.66 3.40** 0.65 -3.99 6.12** 2.13 -2.31 1.68* 0.12 -0.50 4.94** 1.49 -3.94** 0.69 -0.03
(-1.49) ( 2.39) (-0.53) ( 2.17) (-1.39) ( 1.66) (-0.15) ( 2.48) (-2.15) ( 0.59)
UK 1.36 4.18*** 1.44 11.04 6.88*** 4.05 0.22 2.28** 0.38 5.64 5.89*** 3.39 0.16 1.64 0.14
(0.83) (3.61) (1.36) (3.29) (0.15) (2.48) (1.22) (3.66) (0.11) (1.60)
US 0.14 9.57*** 3.41 4.80 18.28*** 7.53 0.20 4.28** 1.05 0.59 13.49*** 5.55 0.38 4.09* 0.84
(0.09) (3.45) (0.53) (3.14) (0.17) (2.46) (0.21) (3.22) (0.24) (1.75)
Pooled 3.97** 2.68*** 0.78 5.83 3.71*** 1.18 3.84** 2.09*** 0.63 – – – – – –
(2.19) (7.53) (0.61) (4.60) (2.41) (7.28) – – – – – –
This table presents the in-sample over the full sample period (Panel A) as well as over various market conditions, namely ﬁnancial crisis (Panel B), non-crisis period (Panel C), recession (Panel D), and
expansion (Panel E). In the individual country-based regressions, we regress the last half-hour return against the ﬁrst half-hour return: rL
t = α +βFrF
t +ϵt. In the pooled panel regressions, we regress the
last half hour against the ﬁrst half-hour return and country dummy variables: rL
i,t =α +βFrF
i,t + ∑16
j=2βjDj,t +ϵi,t. Note that the ﬁrst half-hour return includes the overnight return in order to take into
account the impact of information released overnight. The ﬁnancial crisis period spans form 2 December 2007 to 30 June 2009 (Gao et al. (2018)). Recession indicators are sourced from FRED St. Louis
website. The returns are annualized and in percentage. The Newey and West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. In the pooled regression we also cluster the standard errors by country. The slope
coeﬃcients are scaled by 100. The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
50
Table 4: Out-of-sample Analysis
Ave.Intercept Ave.β F R2
OOS Rst.R2
OOS MSPE −adj. ENC NEW
Australia 5.36*** 4.49*** 1.23 1.10 3.38*** 46.14**
Austria 16.02*** 1.19 0.14 0.12 1.60* 2.56**
Canada 6.12*** 0.00 -0.14 -0.25 -0.84 -1.09
France 3.88 5.97*** -0.35 0.22 2.34*** 27.81**
Germany 2.79 3.62*** -0.64 0.11 1.02 7.32**
Ireland 5.73** 1.42 0.18 0.15 1.70** 3.01**
Japan 3.78* 5.04*** -0.20 -1.32 2.41*** 47.25**
Netherlands 2.52 5.35*** -2.39 -0.79 0.60 6.08**
Norway 1.85 5.92*** 0.92 1.08 3.10*** 19.84**
NZ 1.41** 0.12 -0.03 -0.02 -0.25 -0.16
Portugal 7.91*** 3.14*** -0.25 -0.03 1.01 7.97**
Spain 12.63*** 4.60*** -0.28 0.19 1.72** 22.19**
Sweden 9.57*** 2.17 1.18 0.90 3.36*** 16.23**
Switzerland -3.23 3.84** -0.01 0.05 1.56* 8.69**
UK 2.25 4.96*** -1.25 -0.58 1.00 10.82**
US 0.99 11.67*** -3.10 0.25 2.07** 68.57**
This table reports the individual out-of-sample analysis. Using the ﬁrst ﬁve years (2005-
2010) as the initial estimation period, we recursively estimate the predictive regression in
each market by adding one day at a time. The intercept and slope coeﬃcients are averaged
from individual regressions. The stars next to them are assigned based on average Newey
and West (1987) t-statistics (unreported). The last four columns report Campbell and
Thompson (2008) R2
OOS, Rst.R2
OOS, Clark and West (2007) MSPE −adjusted, and Clark
and McCracken (2001)ENCNEW respectively. We apply Newey and West (1987) corrections
in computing the Clark and West (2007) MSPE −adjusted. For ENCNEW , we use critical
values of 1.280 and 2.085 for 5% and 10% conﬁdence levels, given by Clark and McCracken
(2001). The slope coeﬃcients are scaled by 100. The sample period spans from 04 Oct
2005 to 29 Dec 2017. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.
51
Table 5: Economic Signiﬁcance of Individual Intraday Time Series Momentum
Strategy Mean (%) SD (%) Skewness Kurtosis Sharpe ρ α (%) ARatio
Australia ITSM 2.971 5.823 0.047 3.075 0.510
AL 4.152 5.820 -0.084 3.077 0.713 -0.099 3.384 0.584
BH 3.594 25.612 -0.026 3.019 0.140 0.019 2.956 0.508
Austria ITSM 2.209 6.807 -0.112 3.107 0.324
AL 15.198 6.740 0.113 3.107 2.255*** -0.071 3.293 0.485
BH 3.242 29.034 -0.001 3.020 0.112 0.077 2.150 0.317
Canada ITSM -1.668 4.227 -0.019 3.045 -0.395
AL 4.275 4.220 0.084 3.045 1.013*** -0.047 -1.466 -0.347
BH 4.979 15.985 0.004 3.040 0.311 0.064 -1.751 -0.415
France ITSM 5.149 5.920 0.008 3.018 0.870
AL 2.810 5.926 -0.009 3.018 0.474 -0.053 5.298*** 0.896
BH 4.836 25.805 0.012 3.023 0.187 0.048 5.095*** 0.862
Germany ITSM 4.105 5.591 0.053 3.051 0.734
AL 3.764 5.592 0.027 3.051 0.673 -0.031 4.222** 0.756
BH 7.253 24.763 -0.005 3.017 0.293 0.053 4.019** 0.720
Ireland ITSM 3.297 6.421 0.014 3.031 0.513
AL 4.435 6.418 -0.055 3.032 0.691 -0.036 3.455* 0.538
BH 3.980 25.516 -0.033 3.031 0.156 -0.027 3.324 0.518
Japan ITSM 4.416 6.142 -0.014 3.117 0.719
AL 3.279 6.145 0.113 3.116 0.534 -0.052 4.586** 0.748
BH 12.865 31.756 -0.010 3.028 0.405 -0.027 4.483** 0.730
Netherlands ITSM 2.378 5.412 0.016 3.025 0.439
AL 1.824 5.413 -0.027 3.025 0.337 -0.095 2.552 0.474
BH 1.090 23.888 -0.007 3.030 0.046 -0.037 2.387 0.441
Norway ITSM 7.328 7.529 0.008 3.053 0.973
AL 4.193 7.539 -0.036 3.053 0.556 -0.028 7.446*** 0.990
BH 5.724 21.902 -0.026 3.022 0.261* 0.024 7.280*** 0.967
NZ ITSM 0.495 1.513 0.036 3.022 0.327
AL 1.618 1.510 0.013 3.022 1.071 0.030 0.445 0.295
BH 9.980 19.145 -0.021 3.028 0.521 0.071 0.439 0.291
Portugal ITSM 3.133 5.305 -0.004 3.018 0.591
AL 8.792 5.280 -0.026 3.019 1.665** -0.009 3.213* 0.606
BH -1.277 23.890 0.010 3.020 -0.053 0.067 3.152* 0.596
Spain ITSM 3.323 5.784 0.008 3.016 0.575
AL 11.157 5.745 -0.006 3.017 1.942*** 0.015 3.159* 0.546
BH 9.208 27.886 0.026 3.026 0.330 0.123 3.088* 0.538
Sweden ITSM 2.531 4.391 -0.016 3.017 0.576
AL 7.483 4.368 -0.008 3.018 1.713** -0.057 2.958* 0.675
BH 3.762 19.740 -0.003 3.009 0.191 0.009 2.523 0.575
Switzerland ITSM 0.326 5.262 -0.037 3.038 0.062
AL -1.503 5.261 -0.002 3.038 -0.286 -0.020 0.296 0.056
BH -1.716 22.534 -0.065 3.111 -0.076 0.087 0.361 0.069
UK ITSM 2.605 5.134 0.014 3.018 0.507
AL 1.077 5.136 0.009 3.018 0.210 -0.047 2.656* 0.518
BH 0.841 22.144 0.008 3.036 0.038 0.038 2.598* 0.506
US ITSM 6.567 5.892 0.086 3.099 1.115
AL 0.033 5.907 -0.028 3.099 0.006** -0.106 6.570** 1.122
BH 7.465 19.411 -0.032 3.045 0.385 -0.045 6.669** 1.133
This table presents the performance of intraday time-series momentum (i.e. ITSM) along
with two benchmark strategies, Always-long (i.e.AL) and Buy-and-hold (i.e.BH), for each of
the 16 equity markets. ITSM opens a long (short) position at the beginning of the last half
hour if the return during the ﬁrst half hour on the same trading day is positive (negative), and
closes the positions at the market close. The Always-long strategy takes always a long position
in the last half hour every trading day and the Buy-and-hold strategy holds the asset from
the beginning until the end of the sample period. We report the Mean, Standard Deviation
(SD), Skewness, Kurtosis and the Sharpe ratio for each strategy and market. The table also
presents the correlation (ρ) between the ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns. The α
and appraisal ratio (ARatio) are based on the regression: rI,t = α +βrbenchmark,t +ϵt,
whererI,t andrbenchmark,t are returns from ITSM and benchmark strategies, respectively.
The appraisal ratio is computed as α/σϵ where σϵ is the standard error of the regression.
Standard errors are adjusted using Newey and West (1987).We test the hypothesis that the
Sharpe ratios of the ITSM and the AL or BH strategies are equal following Ledoit and Wolf
(2008). We use Newey-West (1987) standard errors for the statistical signiﬁcance of alpha.
Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness, Kurtosis, Sharpe ratio, and α’s are annualized.
*, **, and *** denote signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% conﬁdence levels, respectively. The
sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
52
Table 6: Correlation Matrix
Australia Austria Canada France Germany Ireland Japan Netherlands Norway NZ Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK US
Australia 1.00
Austria -0.04 1.00
Canada 0.04 0.08 1.00
France -0.01 0.37 0.04 1.00
Germany -0.02 0.35 0.08 0.78 1.00
Ireland -0.03 0.27 -0.03 0.39 0.34 1.00
Japan 0.14 -0.08 -0.05 -0.04 -0.09 -0.05 1.00
Netherlands 0.02 0.33 0.02 0.79 0.69 0.40 -0.02 1.00
Norway 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.07 0.00 1.00
NZ 0.19 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 -0.04 0.03 0.01 0.00 1.00
Portugal 0.00 0.27 -0.02 0.44 0.39 0.27 0.02 0.45 0.06 0.03 1.00
Spain 0.00 0.36 0.04 0.67 0.63 0.33 0.00 0.60 0.06 0.04 0.42 1.00
Sweden 0.05 0.05 -0.05 0.10 0.10 0.02 -0.02 0.07 0.10 0.00 0.03 0.12 1.00
Switzerland 0.04 0.09 0.02 0.15 0.17 0.06 -0.06 0.11 0.08 0.00 0.04 0.11 0.19 1.00
UK 0.03 0.29 0.05 0.63 0.59 0.35 -0.01 0.67 0.02 -0.01 0.31 0.54 0.08 0.19 1.00
US -0.13 -0.01 0.26 0.07 0.09 -0.02 -0.02 0.04 -0.03 0.01 0.00 0.05 -0.01 -0.05 0.02 1.00
Reported are Pearson correlation coeﬃcients between individual intraday time-series momentum strategy returns. The sample period spans
from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
53
Table 7: Cross-country Relation of ITSM
Panel A: Global Common Variation Panel B: Predictability of rF
US
α β t βt+1 βt−1 Adj.R2 (%) α β US βlocal ∆Adj.R2 (%)
Australia 5.75*** 18.30** -17.58** 3.93 1.14 4.79*** -2.48 4.35*** 0.07
(3.16) (2.03) (-2.11) (0.40) (3.14) (-1.46) (3.90)
Austria 0.3 96.69*** 6.46 -18.76 12.39 14.90*** 4.70** 0.25 0.54
(0.16) (11.77) (0.66) (-1.60) (6.24) (2.38) (0.17)
Canada -1.04 10.95 -14.23 4.48 0.97 4.14*** -0.63 -0.76 0.02
(-0.90) (1.17) (-1.48) (0.51) (2.78) (-0.45) (-0.52)
France 0.01 179.83*** -5.74 -1.2 52.9 3.10 4.64*** 3.59*** 0.65
(0.01) (23.22) (-1.23) (-0.18) (1.64) (3.09) (3.76)
Germany -2.46** 147.24*** 6.84 16.14 41.62 3.24* 2.99** 1.89* 0.17
(-2.24) (16.26) (1.33) (1.36) (1.80) (2.05) (1.94)
Ireland 0.01 87.88*** 1.11 6.94 10.42 5.89*** 6.77*** -0.07 1.25
(0.01) (9.70) (0.13) (1.07) (2.85) (4.48) (-0.07)
Japan 5.14*** -2.66 19.22* 3.97 0.61 1.45 0.71 4.04*** 0.12
(2.71) (-0.43) (1.87) (0.45) (0.91) (0.37) (3.70)
Netherlands -2.52** 155.87*** -7.75 -5.86 47.38 2.21 3.84** 2.89*** 0.48
(-2.16) (23.78) (-1.64) (-1.41) (1.33) (2.43) (2.82)
Norway 6.06*** 32.86*** 11.4 -6.08 1.32 3.35 13.58*** 2.68 3.85
(3.02) (2.97) (1.20) (-0.61) (1.54) (6.36) (1.61)
NZ 0.47 2.75 2.44 -2.95 0.51 1.33*** -0.35 0.14 0.01
(0.95) (1.59) (1.32) (-1.22) (2.74) (-0.79) (0.44)
Portugal -0.19 88.03*** -11.82* -4.95 17.44 9.25*** 0.95 1.88** -0.04
(-0.13) (11.18) (-1.68) (-0.93) (5.58) (0.77) (2.00)
Spain -2.43* 154.91*** -0.26 -4.62 41.36 10.83*** 2.36 3.16*** 0.18
(-1.98) (27.86) (-0.06) (-0.95) (5.82) (1.60) (3.19)
Sweden 2.57* 25.95*** -0.41 -11.73* 2.62 7.82*** 4.51*** 2.03* 1.29
(1.84) (4.38) (-0.08) (-1.81) (5.20) (4.52) (1.67)
Switzerland -0.88 42.95*** -3.42 4.46 4.23 -2.89 1.49 3.04** 0.06
(-0.64) (4.89) (-0.54) (0.72) (-1.56) (1.08) (2.01)
UK -0.44 130.3*** 2.55 4.39 36.5 1.62 2.58** 3.52*** 0.34
(-0.35) (22.66) (0.55) (1.03) (0.96) (2.17) (2.99)
US 5.69*** 8.66 12.35 6.42 0.43 – – – –
(2.77) (1.01) (0.93) (0.96) – – – –
Average 1.00 73.78 0.07 -0.34 – – – – –
Panel A reports the results of global the comovement analysis:rI,i,t =αi +βtrI,g,t +βt+1rI,g,t+1 +βt−1rI,g,t −1 +ϵi,t, whererI,i,t
is the ITSM return for market i at time t, rI,g,t is the contemporaneous equally-weighted ITSM return of all markets excluding
market i, rI,g,t+1 is the equally-weighted ITSM return for all markets excluding market i at t + 1, and rI,g,t −1 is the equally-
weighted ITSM return for all markets excluding market i at t− 1. In Panel B, we study the predictive power of the US ﬁrst
half-hour return (rF
US ) on the last half-hour returns of other countries, after controlling for those countries’ own ﬁrst half-hour
return. For most of the countries, we regress the following model: rL
local,t = α +βlocalrF
local,t +βUSrF
US,t +ϵt. For Australia,
Japan, and New Zealand, whose markets close before the US market open on the same calendar day, we use the US ﬁrst half-hour
return from the previous day: rL
local,t = α +βlocalrF
local,t +βUSrF
US,t−1 +ϵt. We also test the null hypothesis that there is no
predictability of rF
US using wild bootstrapped data, and report βUS s in bold if reject the null at 10% conﬁdence level. The last
column of Panel B (∆Adj.R2) gives the increase of the adjusted R2 in Equation (2) after including rF
US . The returns are annualized
and in percentage, the Newey and West (1987) t values are reported in parentheses, the βs are scaled by 100. The sample period
spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
54
Table 8: Investing Intraday Time Series Momentum Globally
Type (1) GITSM Type (2) GITSM Type (3) GITSM
EW VW IV MD MV MinV EW VW IV MD MV MinV EW VW IV MD MV MinV
Panel A: Global Portfolio Performance
AVE (%) 3.06*** 4.75*** 0.77 1.48*** 2.02 0.43 2.78*** 2.71*** 1.50** 1.35** 0.45 1.47** 5.17*** 5.71*** 1.18* 1.90*** 6.75*** 0.62
(4.15) (3.22) (1.51) (2.79) (1.11) (0.93) (3.83) (2.88) (2.32) (2.11) (0.45) (2.28) (5.47) (3.65) (1.91) (3.23) (2.94) (1.37)
SD (%) 2.43 3.22 1.21 1.18 3.81 1.03 2.01 2.41 1.47 1.44 2.39 1.46 2.93 3.51 1.39 1.31 5.36 1.09
Skewness 0.01 0.10 0.01 0.03 -0.04 0.00 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.10 0.01 0.03 0.02 -0.01
Kurtosis 3.03 3.10 3.01 3.01 3.06 3.02 3.05 3.06 3.01 3.01 3.03 3.01 3.03 3.10 3.01 3.01 3.02 3.02
Sharpe 1.26 1.48 0.64 1.26 0.53 0.42 1.38 1.12 1.02 0.94 0.19 1.01 1.77 1.63 0.85 1.44 1.26 0.57
Panel B: Spanning Alphas (GITSM vs ITSM)
Australia 2.84*** 4.75*** 0.60 1.24** 2.13 0.33 2.43*** 2.58*** 1.06* 0.94 0.37 1.02* 4.59*** 5.39*** 1.06* 1.83*** 7.11*** 0.57
Austria 2.66*** 4.62*** 0.40 1.17** 1.35 0.30 2.59*** 2.51** 1.10* 0.99 -0.24 1.10* 4.44*** 5.17*** 0.93 1.73*** 6.85*** 0.56
Canada 3.25*** 5.13*** 0.97* 1.82*** 2.69 0.66 3.18*** 3.33*** 1.95*** 1.90*** 0.97 1.93*** 4.73*** 5.58*** 1.21* 2.05*** 7.16*** 0.70
France 1.40*** 3.69*** 0.45 1.31*** 1.09 0.34 1.93*** 1.86** 1.19** 1.07* -0.12 1.18** 3.82*** 4.68*** 0.95 1.76*** 6.89*** 0.56
Germany 1.74*** 3.86*** 0.60 1.39*** 1.66 0.39 2.09*** 1.98** 1.33** 1.20** 0.15 1.32** 3.91*** 4.67*** 1.01* 1.81*** 7.01*** 0.57
Ireland 2.44*** 4.54*** 0.76 1.48*** 2.02 0.43 2.52*** 2.46*** 1.49** 1.35** 0.44 1.47** 4.29*** 5.12*** 1.09* 1.86*** 7.05*** 0.60
Japan 2.84*** 4.26*** 0.70 1.26*** 2.08 0.32 2.30*** 2.53*** 1.15** 1.02* 0.41 1.12** 4.76*** 5.43*** 1.11* 1.91*** 7.16*** 0.61
Netherlands 2.27*** 4.27*** 0.82* 1.51*** 2.15 0.45 2.38*** 2.32** 1.55** 1.40** 0.55 1.52** 4.27*** 5.02*** 1.11* 1.87*** 7.07*** 0.60
Norway 2.42*** 4.63*** 0.57 1.08** 1.85 0.31 2.40*** 2.38** 1.16* 1.06* 0.15 1.15* 4.62*** 5.28*** 1.13* 1.86*** 5.63** 0.63
NZ 3.00*** 4.71*** 0.86** 1.55*** 2.03 0.56** 2.67*** 2.65*** 1.54** 1.39** 0.47 1.52** 4.56*** 5.19*** 1.10* 1.88*** 7.10*** 0.62
Portugal 2.29*** 4.43*** 0.47 1.29*** 1.49 0.32 2.41*** 2.37** 1.24** 1.12* -0.06 1.23** 4.32*** 5.13*** 0.97 1.76*** 7.00*** 0.55
Spain 2.05*** 4.15*** 0.48 1.33** 1.43 0.36 2.25*** 2.19** 1.21** 1.09* -0.06 1.20** 4.17*** 4.96*** 0.96 1.77*** 6.86*** 0.55
Sweden 2.73*** 4.65*** 0.28 0.83* 1.58 0.04 2.63*** 2.59*** 1.06* 0.96 -0.40 1.06* 4.46*** 5.18*** 0.88 1.64*** 6.39*** 0.53
Switzerland 3.02*** 4.73*** 0.62 1.30** 2.01 0.31 2.76*** 2.69*** 1.39** 1.26** 0.24 1.38** 4.56*** 5.21*** 1.05* 1.84*** 7.19*** 0.59
UK 2.22*** 4.17*** 0.87** 1.54*** 2.20 0.47 2.34*** 2.28** 1.59*** 1.44** 0.62 1.57*** 4.20*** 5.00*** 1.13* 1.89*** 7.08*** 0.61
US 2.58*** 1.58*** 0.70 1.31*** 0.89 0.35 1.56*** 0.72 1.28** 1.06* 0.09 1.25** 3.64*** 1.79*** 0.94 1.62*** 6.68*** 0.51
Panel C: Spanning Alphas (ITSM vs GITSM)
Australia 1.63 3.00 2.44 1.38 3.08 2.72 0.17 2.28 1.07 1.31 2.94 1.02 3.09 3.85* 2.90 2.79 3.07 2.91
Austria -2.28 0.94 2.12 1.13 2.84 3.13* -0.58 0.26 1.53 1.80 3.13* 1.65 0.69 1.77 2.89 2.48 3.16 3.38*
Canada -2.71** -3.54*** -3.26** -4.00*** -3.22** -3.22** -4.62*** -4.74*** -3.86*** -3.99*** -3.07** -3.87*** -2.56* -3.35** -3.15** -3.55*** -3.02** -3.09**
France -0.77 1.81 -0.17 -0.46 0.30 1.49 1.13 2.42 -0.79 -0.38 1.42 -0.61 2.33 3.57* 0.96 0.66 1.48 1.76
Germany -1.15 0.98 -0.83 -1.06 -0.05 0.62 0.46 1.50 -1.39 -1.04 0.53 -1.23 1.31 2.32 0.06 -0.13 0.77 0.73
Ireland -0.79 2.09 -1.13 -2.32 -0.51 -0.33 1.00 1.85 -1.64 -1.36 -0.29 -1.52 1.35 2.77 -0.39 -0.56 -0.16 -0.01
Japan 3.37 2.42 2.18 -0.02 2.62 2.04 1.53 3.66* 0.02 0.30 2.51 -0.06 5.24** 5.17** 2.66 3.13 2.81 2.61
Netherlands -2.80** -0.35 -2.01 -2.07 -1.37 -0.70 -1.11 0.10 -2.40 -2.09 -0.77 -2.25 0.28 1.33 -1.13 -1.24 -0.56 -0.47
Norway 4.74* 6.91*** 8.05*** 6.93*** 8.33*** 8.24*** 5.31** 6.16** 7.61*** 7.77*** 8.33*** 7.66*** 7.54*** 7.55*** 8.48*** 8.40*** 7.21*** 8.46***
NZ 0.33 0.41 -0.64 -0.80 -0.20 -0.64** 0.14 0.36 -0.46 -0.44 -0.20 -0.47 0.45 0.44 -0.27 -0.34 -0.29 -0.31
Portugal -0.51 1.80 1.18 0.75 1.93 2.20 0.78 1.70 0.98 1.24 2.25 1.10 1.84 2.80* 1.99 1.58 2.49 2.39
Spain -1.98 0.55 0.42 0.30 1.20 1.80 -0.36 0.89 -0.12 0.22 1.69 0.03 1.12 2.25 1.31 1.04 1.59 1.88
Sweden 1.24 2.22 3.77** 2.46* 4.35*** 4.07** 1.80 2.16 3.65** 3.77** 4.34*** 3.70** 2.08 2.45 4.19*** 3.84** 4.05** 4.44***
Switzerland -1.66 -0.27 1.28 0.04 2.02 1.56 -0.79 -0.33 1.33 1.48 1.88 1.38 -0.47 0.30 1.81 1.88 2.39 2.01
UK -1.87 -0.08 -2.06 -2.29 -1.25 -0.99 -0.48 0.58 -2.43* -2.14 -0.97 -2.31* 0.54 1.67 -1.32 -1.43 -0.79 -0.73
US 5.22** -1.18 1.81 0.82 0.96 1.83 2.10 1.60 1.01 0.77 1.85 0.99 3.84 -1.24 1.48 0.28 1.42 1.75
This table presents the performance of global intraday time-series momentum strategies (GTISM). Three types of GITSM are studied: (1) GITSM based
on individual ITSMs; (2) GITSM based on regional ITSMs; (3) GITSM based on cross-sectional predictability of US ﬁrst half-hour return. See text for a
detailed description. Panel A reports the portfolio performance of each type of GITSM constructed using six teqhniques, namely, equally-weighted (EW),
value-weighed (VW), inverse-variance (IV), maximum-diversiﬁcation (MD), mean-variance (MV) and minimum-variance (MinV). The equally-weighted and value-
weighted portfolios are based on the full sample period (04/10/2005 - 29/12/2017), whereas the ﬁrst ﬁve years (04/10/2005 - 01/10/2010) are treated as the initial
estimation period for the remaining techniques, in which we use an expanding window approach. Panel B reports the alphas of spanning regressions of GITSM
against individual ITSM, while Panel C reports the alphas when the regressand and regressor are reversed. In parentheses, we report the Newey and West (1987)
t-statistics for strategy returns that are annualized and in percentage. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively, after Newey
and West (1987) corrections.
55
Table 9: Factor Exposure of GITSM on Fama-French Pricing Models
Panel A: Without TVC Panel B: TVC included
CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM
Intercept2.911***2.897*** 2.907*** 2.973*** 2.973*** -0.365 -0.387 -0.344 -0.149 -0.145
(3.85) (3.83) (3.81) (3.83) (3.83) (-0.41) (-0.43) (-0.38) (-0.16) (-0.16)
Market 0.011 0.008 0.008 0.007 0.007 -0.009 -0.002 -0.003 -0.009 -0.009
(1.42) (1.03) (1.04) (0.82) (0.82) (-1.34) (-0.24) (-0.35) (-1.07) (-1.07)
SMB -0.004 -0.004 -0.007 -0.007 0.026 0.027 0.020 0.021
(-0.34) (-0.32) (-0.57) (-0.57) (1.13) (1.09) (1.06) (0.99)
HML 0.016 0.015 0.012 0.012 -0.019 -0.022 -0.026 -0.027
(1.22) (1.07) (0.88) (0.85) (-1.45) (-1.28) (-1.37) (-1.17)
RMW -0.015 -0.015 -0.039 -0.038
(-0.70) (-0.69) (-1.12) (-1.23)
CMA -0.004 -0.004 -0.028 -0.027
(-0.15) (-0.15) (-1.01) (-1.12)
MOM -0.001 0.000 -0.006 -0.002
(-0.18) (-0.01) (-0.45) (-0.13)
TVC 1.187***1.190*** 1.190*** 1.190*** 1.190***
(56.01) (57.33) (57.10) (57.09) (57.04)
Adj.R2(%) 0.44 0.47 0.43 0.43 0.38 73.23 73.35 73.35 73.39 73.38
Panel A reports the results of time-series regressions of Global Intraday Time-series Momentum (GITSM) against
CAPM model, Fama-French global 3 factors model, Fama-French global 3 factors model plus the global momentum
factor, Fama-French global 5 factors model, and Fama-French global 5 factors model plus the global momentum
factor respectively. Panel B reports the regression results where the doubled GITSM return is regressed against the
same factors in Panel A along with a time-varying factor (TVC). Multiplying the return of GITSM by 2 ensures
the total dollar value invested in the strategy is $2 and facilitates the construction of TVC (see text for details).
The returns are annualized and in percentage. Newey and West (1987) t values are reported in parentheses. *,
**, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. The sample period spans from 04
October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
56
Table 10: Cross-sectional Sorting Analysis of Intraday Time-series Momentum
Small Medium Large Small Medium Large
Panel A: Spread Panel B: Volatility
AVE(%) 2.67*** 3.33*** 3.23*** 2.57*** 3.02*** 3.61***
(3.24) (3.47) (3.07) (3.10) (3.11) (2.97)
SD 2.61 3.07 3.54 2.67 3.05 3.64
Sharpe Ratio 1.02 1.09 0.91 0.96 0.99 0.99
Skewness 0.01 0.00 -0.01 0.05 0.02 -0.01
Kurtosis 3.02 3.02 3.03 3.04 3.02 3.01
Panel C: ID Panel D: Individualism
AVE(%) 4.21*** 3.75*** 1.15 3.44*** 3.19*** 2.57***
(4.27) (3.90) (1.17) (3.01) (3.83) (2.69)
SD 3.07 3.03 3.15 3.63 2.67 2.80
Sharpe Ratio 1.37 1.24 0.37 0.95 1.19 0.92
Skewness 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.02 -0.02 0.05
Kurtosis 3.02 3.01 3.05 3.01 3.02 3.03
57
Table B.1: Individual ITSM in Local Currency
Intercept β F Adj.R2 (%)
Australia 3.15*** 4.76*** 3.92
(3.27) (5.59)
Austria 13.84*** 0.61 -0.01
(6.21) (0.38)
Canada 4.87*** 2.00 0.24
(3.54) (1.10)
France 0.67 5.93*** 2.68
(0.41) (5.01)
Germany 1.26 3.98*** 1.22
(0.82) (3.45)
Ireland 3.10* 1.63* 0.17
(1.67) (1.84)
Japan 0.65 5.60*** 3.70
(0.49) (4.28)
Netherlands -0.10 5.37*** 2.32
(-0.07) ( 3.73)
Norway 1.10 7.05*** 1.70
(0.48) (4.24)
NZ 0.09** -0.01 -0.03
( 2.39) (-0.75)
Portugal 5.63*** 3.33*** 0.99
(4.06) (3.99)
Spain 9.24*** 4.24*** 1.43
(5.54) (3.53)
Sweden 7.62*** 5.46*** 3.20
(5.75) (6.58)
Switzerland 1.24 4.17*** 1.45
(0.92) (2.89)
UK -0.54 6.96*** 3.26
(-0.37) ( 4.99)
US 0.14 9.57*** 3.41
(0.09) (3.45)
In this table, we replicate the in-sample statistical analysis conducted in Panel
A Table 3 but using data in local currency. Returns are annualized and in
percentage. The Newey and West (1987) t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017. *, **, and
*** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
58
Table B.2: Economic Signiﬁcance of Individual Intraday Time Series Momentum
Strategy Mean (%) SD (%) Skewness Kurtosis Sharpe ρ α (%) ARatio
Australia ITSM 4.686 3.306 0.028 3.023 1.418
AL 2.857 3.314 0.012 3.023 0.862 0.010 4.657*** 1.409
BH 3.330 16.838 -0.028 3.016 0.198*** 0.016 4.675*** 1.415
Austria ITSM 0.839 6.368 -0.135 3.134 0.132
AL 14.014 6.307 0.151 3.134 2.222*** -0.096 2.197 0.347
BH 1.496 25.026 -0.008 3.020 0.060 0.078 0.809 0.128
Canada ITSM 0.070 4.420 0.013 3.083 0.016
AL 5.046 4.408 0.112 3.082 1.145** -0.070 0.425 0.096
BH 4.508 17.814 -0.024 3.048 0.253 0.050 0.015 0.003
France ITSM 2.827 5.036 -0.002 3.024 0.561
AL 0.756 5.039 0.000 3.024 0.150 -0.070 2.879* 0.573
BH 2.977 22.175 0.007 3.019 0.134 0.043 2.798* 0.556
Germany ITSM 2.677 4.931 0.059 3.067 0.543
AL 2.306 4.932 0.042 3.068 0.468 -0.036 2.759* 0.560
BH 5.422 21.353 -0.003 3.018 0.254 0.049 2.615* 0.531
Ireland ITSM 4.374 5.489 0.024 3.042 0.797
AL 1.262 5.496 -0.059 3.043 0.230 -0.060 4.450** 0.812
BH 2.446 23.008 -0.033 3.032 0.106 -0.069 4.414** 0.806
Japan ITSM 5.347 5.384 0.030 3.080 0.993
AL 2.437 5.392 0.070 3.079 0.452 -0.020 5.396*** 1.003
BH 10.366 24.526 -0.015 3.034 0.423 -0.021 5.395*** 1.003
Netherlands ITSM 1.118 4.514 0.036 3.030 0.248
AL -0.075 4.516 -0.029 3.030 -0.017 -0.083 1.112 0.247
BH -0.670 20.473 -0.017 3.027 -0.033 -0.011 1.117 0.247
Norway ITSM 11.330 7.599 0.011 3.075 1.491
AL 2.813 7.633 -0.073 3.074 0.369*** -0.077 11.546*** 1.524
BH 2.665 22.868 -0.044 3.024 0.117*** -0.021 11.349*** 1.494
NZ ITSM -0.007 0.148 0.475 5.152 -0.051
AL 0.112 0.148 1.188 5.147 0.760** 0.163 -0.026 -0.177
BH 10.997 10.709 -0.017 3.024 1.027** 0.032 -0.012 -0.083
Portugal ITSM 3.241 4.300 0.006 3.024 0.754
AL 6.132 4.288 -0.019 3.025 1.430 0.019 3.125** 0.727
BH -2.541 20.258 0.007 3.019 -0.125** 0.063 3.275** 0.763
Spain ITSM 2.863 5.166 0.003 3.014 0.554
AL 9.877 5.131 0.001 3.015 1.925*** -0.029 3.148* 0.610
BH 7.044 23.982 0.024 3.024 0.294 0.110 2.696* 0.525
Sweden ITSM 7.619 3.803 0.016 3.013 2.003
AL 7.183 3.808 -0.006 3.014 1.886 -0.066 8.091*** 2.133
BH 1.065 20.444 -0.012 3.017 0.052*** 0.037 7.611*** 2.003
Switzerland ITSM 1.478 3.756 0.014 3.028 0.394
AL 2.301 3.754 0.012 3.028 0.613 -0.033 1.555 0.414
BH 1.539 17.389 -0.026 3.024 0.088 0.042 1.464 0.390
UK ITSM 2.412 4.372 0.010 3.018 0.552
AL 0.206 4.375 0.016 3.018 0.047 -0.078 2.428 0.557
BH 0.548 18.214 -0.003 3.024 0.030 0.009 2.411 0.552
US ITSM 6.611 5.897 0.086 3.099 1.121
AL 0.060 5.912 -0.028 3.099 0.010** -0.107 6.617** 1.129
BH 7.618 19.425 -0.032 3.045 0.392 -0.045 6.716** 1.140
This table presents the performance of intraday time-series momentum (i.e. ITSM) along with
two benchmark strategies, Always-long (i.e.AL) and Buy-and-hold (i.e.BH), for each of the 16
equity markets using data based on local currencies. ITSM opens a long (short) position
at the beginning of the last half hour if the return during the ﬁrst half hour on the same
trading day is positive (negative), and closes the positions at the market close. The Always-
long strategy takes always a long position in the last half hour every trading day and the
Buy-and-hold strategy holds the asset from the beginning until the end of the sample period.
The Table reports the Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness, Kurtosis and the Sharpe
ratio for each strategy and market. The table also presents the correlation ( ρ) between the
ITSM and the benchmark strategies returns. The α and appraisal ratio (ARatio) are based
on the regression: rI,t =α +βrbenchmark,t +ϵt, where rI,t and rbenchmark,t are returns
from ITSM and benchmark strategies, respectively. The appraisal ratio is computed as α/σϵ
where σϵ is the standard error of the regression. Standard errors are adjusted using Newey
and West (1987).We test the hypothesis that the Sharpe ratios of the ITSM and the AL or BH
strategies are equal following Ledoit and Wolf (2008). We use Newey-West (1987) standard
errors for the statistical signiﬁcance of alpha. Mean, Standard Deviation (SD), Skewness,
Kurtosis, Sharpe ratio, and α’s are annualized. *, **, and *** denote signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%,
and 1% conﬁdence levels, respectively. The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29
December 2017.
59
Table B.3: Investing Intraday Time Series Momentum Globally – Rolling Approach
Type (1) GITSM Type (2) GITSM Type (3) GITSM
EW VW IV MD MV MinV EW VW IV MD MV MinV EW VW IV MD MV MinV
Panel A: Global Portfolio Performance
AVE (%) 3.06*** 4.75*** 0.76 1.48*** 2.84 0.48 2.78*** 2.71*** 1.54** 1.37** -0.95 1.51** 5.17*** 5.71*** 1.13* 1.71*** 4.64** 0.45
(4.15) (3.22) (1.50) (2.77) (1.33) (1.05) (3.83) (2.88) (2.38) (2.15) (-0.78) (2.34) (5.47) (3.65) (1.86) (2.88) (2.15) (1.00)
SD (%) 2.43 3.22 1.18 1.18 4.39 1.01 2.01 2.41 1.46 1.44 2.56 1.46 2.93 3.51 1.36 1.31 5.08 1.07
Skewness 0.01 0.10 0.02 0.04 -0.03 0.01 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 -0.06 0.03 0.03 0.10 0.02 0.03 0.04 -0.01
Kurtosis 3.03 3.10 3.02 3.01 3.05 3.01 3.05 3.06 3.01 3.01 3.12 3.01 3.03 3.10 3.01 3.01 3.02 3.01
Sharpe 1.26 1.48 0.64 1.25 0.65 0.48 1.38 1.12 1.05 0.95 -0.37 1.03 1.77 1.63 0.83 1.30 0.91 0.43
Panel B: Spanning Alphas (GITSM vs ITSM)
Australia 2.84*** 4.75*** 0.58 1.22** 3.01 0.35 2.43*** 2.58*** 1.11* 0.97* -0.99 1.07* 4.59*** 5.39*** 1.01* 1.64*** 4.93** 0.41
Austria 2.66*** 4.62*** 0.39 1.18** 2.45 0.34 2.59*** 2.51** 1.17* 1.01* -1.50 1.15* 4.44*** 5.17*** 0.89 1.55** 4.74** 0.39
Canada 3.25*** 5.13*** 1.00** 1.85*** 3.53* 0.76* 3.18*** 3.33*** 2.06*** 1.96*** -0.15 2.04*** 4.73*** 5.58*** 1.19* 1.89*** 4.99** 0.56
France 1.40*** 3.69*** 0.45 1.30*** 2.54 0.39 1.93*** 1.86** 1.25** 1.09* -1.38 1.23** 3.82*** 4.68*** 0.91 1.58*** 4.80** 0.39
Germany 1.74*** 3.86*** 0.60 1.39*** 2.74 0.44 2.09*** 1.98** 1.39** 1.22** -1.18 1.36** 3.91*** 4.67*** 0.96 1.62*** 4.90** 0.40
Ireland 2.44*** 4.54*** 0.75 1.48*** 2.84 0.48 2.52*** 2.46*** 1.53** 1.37** -0.96 1.50** 4.29*** 5.12*** 1.04* 1.67*** 4.98** 0.43
Japan 2.84*** 4.26*** 0.69 1.28** 2.81 0.38 2.30*** 2.53*** 1.20** 1.06* -0.98 1.16** 4.76*** 5.43*** 1.06* 1.72*** 5.03** 0.44
Netherlands 2.27*** 4.27*** 0.81* 1.51*** 2.88 0.50 2.38*** 2.32** 1.58*** 1.41** -0.88 1.55** 4.27*** 5.02*** 1.06* 1.68*** 5.01** 0.43
Norway 2.42*** 4.63*** 0.52 0.99* -0.13 0.30 2.40*** 2.38** 1.19* 1.07* -1.00 1.18* 4.62*** 5.28*** 1.06* 1.66*** 4.25** 0.44
NZ 3.00*** 4.71*** 0.85** 1.54*** 2.85 0.60** 2.67*** 2.65*** 1.58** 1.41** -0.92 1.55** 4.56*** 5.19*** 1.05* 1.68*** 5.02** 0.45
Portugal 2.29*** 4.43*** 0.48 1.29** 2.75 0.38 2.41*** 2.37** 1.30** 1.14* -1.35 1.28** 4.32*** 5.13*** 0.93 1.57*** 4.85** 0.38
Spain 2.05*** 4.15*** 0.48 1.32** 2.68 0.41 2.25*** 2.19** 1.27** 1.12* -1.31 1.26** 4.17*** 4.96*** 0.92 1.58*** 4.71** 0.38
Sweden 2.73*** 4.65*** 0.29 0.88* 2.41 0.12 2.63*** 2.59*** 1.15* 0.98 -1.69 1.13* 4.46*** 5.18*** 0.84 1.47*** 4.35** 0.36
Switzerland 3.02*** 4.73*** 0.62 1.28** 2.87 0.37 2.76*** 2.69*** 1.45** 1.29** -1.13 1.42** 4.56*** 5.21*** 1.00 1.66*** 5.03** 0.42
UK 2.22*** 4.17*** 0.86** 1.54*** 2.88 0.52 2.34*** 2.28** 1.63*** 1.46** -0.83 1.59*** 4.20*** 5.00*** 1.08* 1.69*** 5.03** 0.44
US 2.58*** 1.58*** 0.67 1.30*** 1.82 0.38 1.56*** 0.72 1.28** 1.07* -1.57 1.25** 3.64*** 1.79*** 0.87 1.41*** 4.57** 0.32
Panel C: Spanning Alphas (ITSM vs GITSM)
Australia 1.63 3.00 2.39 1.26 3.14 2.60 0.17 2.28 1.09 1.34 3.01 1.06 3.09 3.85* 2.89 2.81 2.91 2.93
Austria -2.28 0.94 2.09 1.21 3.11* 3.04 -0.58 0.26 1.61 1.80 4.10** 1.71 0.69 1.77 2.91 2.69 3.18* 3.43*
Canada -2.71** -3.54*** -3.34** -4.08*** -3.24** -3.33*** -4.62*** -4.74*** -4.04*** -4.08*** -2.60** -4.04*** -2.56* -3.35** -3.19** -3.57*** -2.95** -3.09**
France -0.77 1.81 -0.13 -0.45 1.42 1.42 1.13 2.42 -0.66 -0.39 2.80 -0.52 2.33 3.57* 1.01 0.84 1.52 1.83
Germany -1.15 0.98 -0.80 -1.03 0.71 0.57 0.46 1.50 -1.26 -1.03 1.70 -1.14 1.31 2.32 0.10 0.01 0.68 0.81
Ireland -0.79 2.09 -1.13 -2.12 -0.23 -0.36 1.00 1.85 -1.57 -1.37 0.46 -1.47 1.35 2.77 -0.36 -0.47 -0.15 0.01
Japan 3.37 2.42 2.16 0.28 2.50 2.02 1.53 3.66* -0.01 0.34 2.57 -0.04 5.24** 5.17** 2.67 3.04 2.63 2.59
Netherlands -2.80** -0.35 -1.99 -2.06 -0.69 -0.75 -1.11 0.10 -2.30 -2.10 0.36 -2.19 0.28 1.33 -1.08 -1.09 -0.57 -0.42
Norway 4.74* 6.91*** 7.98*** 6.65*** 6.93*** 8.11*** 5.31** 6.16** 7.57*** 7.74*** 8.43*** 7.62*** 7.54*** 7.55*** 8.45*** 8.38*** 7.92*** 8.42***
NZ 0.33 0.41 -0.63 -0.76 -0.20 -0.69** 0.14 0.36 -0.46 -0.44 -0.15 -0.47 0.45 0.44 -0.27 -0.33 -0.25 -0.27
Portugal -0.51 1.80 1.25 0.77 2.50 2.18 0.78 1.70 1.07 1.24 3.15* 1.16 1.84 2.80* 2.03 1.75 2.37 2.47
Spain -1.98 0.55 0.46 0.25 1.87 1.75 -0.36 0.89 0.00 0.23 2.74 0.13 1.12 2.25 1.35 1.16 1.53 1.95
Sweden 1.24 2.22 3.78** 2.65* 4.35*** 4.02** 1.80 2.16 3.71** 3.78** 4.86*** 3.74** 2.08 2.45 4.21*** 3.95** 4.17*** 4.46***
Switzerland -1.66 -0.27 1.31 -0.02 2.09 1.49 -0.79 -0.33 1.40 1.49 2.30 1.44 -0.47 0.30 1.84 1.96 2.13 2.03
UK -1.87 -0.08 -2.07 -2.26 -0.76 -1.05 -0.48 0.58 -2.36* -2.16 -0.11 -2.27 0.54 1.67 -1.30 -1.32 -0.87 -0.70
US 5.22** -1.18 1.73 0.73 1.02 1.72 2.10 1.60 0.80 0.66 2.66* 0.80 3.84 -1.24 1.41 0.35 1.49 1.77
This table presents the performance of global intraday time-series momentum strategies (GTISM) as in Table 8 constructed using a rolling window, instead of
expanding window, approach.
60
Table B.4: Factor Exposure by Liquidity
CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM
Panel A: Liquidity (without TVC)
Low Medium High
Intercept 3.955*** 3.945*** 3.936*** 4.034*** 4.024*** 2.549** 2.536** 2.538** 2.426** 2.432** 2.304*** 2.283*** 2.323*** 2.569*** 2.573***
(3.65) (3.63) (3.61) (3.70) (3.68) (2.53) (2.51) (2.49) (2.37) (2.37) (2.73) (2.70) (2.79) (2.99) (3.00)
Market 0.014 0.008 0.008 0.005 0.005 0.010 0.008 0.008 0.010 0.010 0.008 0.009 0.009 0.004 0.004
(1.30) (0.70) (0.72) (0.43) (0.42) (0.92) (0.80) (0.78) (0.88) (0.88) (1.24) (1.50) (1.52) (0.56) (0.56)
SMB -0.020 -0.021 -0.023 -0.024 -0.002 -0.002 -0.001 -0.001 0.011 0.012 0.004 0.005
(-1.11) (-1.12) (-1.27) (-1.32) (-0.14) (-0.14) (-0.08) (-0.04) (0.40) (0.42) (0.18) (0.19)
HML 0.024 0.025 0.030 0.032 0.013 0.013 0.019 0.017 0.010 0.007 -0.013 -0.013
(1.18) (1.17) (1.32) (1.39) (0.78) (0.76) (0.93) (0.82) (0.82) (0.42) (-0.65) (-0.58)
RMW -0.005 -0.007 0.023 0.024 -0.069* -0.068*
(-0.16) (-0.22) (0.70) (0.73) (-1.70) (-1.77)
CMA -0.017 -0.019 0.006 0.008 -0.003 -0.002
(-0.44) (-0.51) (0.18) (0.22) (-0.14) (-0.11)
MOM 0.001 0.004 0.000 -0.002 -0.005 -0.001
(0.12) (0.34) (-0.03) (-0.29) (-0.47) (-0.12)
Adj.R2(%) 0.398 0.582 0.539 0.542 0.505 0.187 0.145 0.100 0.106 0.064 0.210 0.205 0.198 0.849 0.806
Panel B: Liquidity (TVC included)
Low Medium High
Intercept 2.901** 2.910** 2.998** 3.152** 3.174** 0.284 0.282 0.322 0.414 0.420 -0.993 -1.025 -0.991 -0.787 -0.782
(2.31) (2.31) (2.33) (2.36) (2.37) (0.25) (0.25) (0.28) (0.36) (0.36) (-0.78) (-0.81) (-0.81) (-0.64) (-0.64)
Market -0.003 0.001 0.000 -0.006 -0.006 -0.009* -0.006 -0.007 -0.012 -0.012 0.000 0.007 0.006 0.004 0.004
(-0.33) (0.12) (0.00) (-0.58) (-0.57) (-1.68) (-0.94) (-1.04) (-1.37) (-1.37) (-0.02) (0.57) (0.55) (0.29) (0.29)
SMB 0.009 0.012 0.005 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.006 0.007 0.032 0.033 0.026 0.026
(0.42) (0.50) (0.25) (0.34) (0.43) (0.48) (0.33) (0.35) (1.12) (1.09) (1.05) (0.99)
HML -0.025 -0.032 -0.022 -0.028 -0.006 -0.009 0.005 0.004 -0.003 -0.006 -0.033 -0.034
(-1.10) (-1.20) (-0.74) (-0.83) (-0.39) (-0.61) (0.30) (0.21) (-0.17) (-0.25) (-1.44) (-1.20)
RMW -0.028 -0.024 -0.001 0.000 -0.068 -0.068*
(-0.65) (-0.59) (-0.04) (0.00) (-1.64) (-1.76)
CMA -0.040 -0.035 -0.041 -0.039 0.015 0.016
(-1.29) (-1.24) (-1.31) (-1.27) (0.49) (0.59)
MOM -0.012 -0.008 -0.005 -0.002 -0.004 -0.002
(-0.89) (-0.67) (-0.52) (-0.23) (-0.30) (-0.14)
TVF 3.297*** 3.304*** 3.305*** 3.304*** 3.305*** 2.896*** 2.897*** 2.897*** 2.899*** 2.899*** 3.299*** 3.303*** 3.302*** 3.291*** 3.291***
(67.13) (71.71) (71.97) (70.94) (71.34) (57.91) (57.67) (57.67) (57.57) (57.60) (38.16) (39.29) (39.62) (41.20) (41.21)
Adj.R2(%) 71.514 71.532 71.545 71.551 71.548 72.994 72.978 72.972 72.991 72.980 51.425 51.509 51.494 51.647 51.626
In this table, we examine the Fama-French factor exposure of equally-weighted ITSM within groups by Corwin and Schultz (2012) High-Low liquidity. Panel A reports
the regression results where the equally-weighted ITSM within low, medium, and high liquidity groups are regressed against the global market factor (CAPM), global
Fama-French 3 factors (FF3), global Fama-French 3 factors plus the (cross-sectional) momentum factor (FF3+MOM), global Fama-French 5 factors (FF5), and global
Fama-French 5 factors plus the momentum factor (FF5+MOM) respectively. In Panel B, we repeat the analyses with the time-varying factor (TVF, for details see text)
constructed and included as an additional regressor. The returns are annualized and in percentage. Newey and West (1987) t values are reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
61
Table B.5: Factor Exposure by Information Discreteness
CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM CAPM FF3 FF3+MOM FF5 FF5+MOM
Panel A: Information Discreteness (without TVC)
Small Medium Large
Intercept 4.006*** 3.993*** 3.971*** 3.960*** 3.952*** 3.109*** 3.101*** 3.121*** 3.185*** 3.192*** 1.579 1.556 1.587 1.732* 1.732*
(4.11) (4.06) (4.00) (4.00) (3.97) (3.22) (3.21) (3.24) (3.24) (3.25) (1.60) (1.58) (1.60) (1.71) (1.71)
Market 0.005 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.011 0.009 0.008 0.009 0.009 0.015 0.015 0.015 0.009 0.009
(0.52) (0.09) (0.12) (0.10) (0.10) (1.45) (1.11) (1.08) (1.00) (1.01) (1.43) (1.25) (1.29) (0.89) (0.89)
SMB -0.012 -0.013 -0.012 -0.013 -0.006 -0.006 -0.010 -0.009 0.007 0.008 0.003 0.003
(-0.76) (-0.82) (-0.74) (-0.80) (-0.43) (-0.39) (-0.71) (-0.67) (0.42) (0.47) (0.21) (0.21)
HML 0.021 0.023 0.027 0.029 0.012 0.010 -0.009 -0.011 0.015 0.012 0.024 0.023
(1.55) (1.56) (1.42) (1.51) (0.66) (0.55) (-0.48) (-0.54) (0.88) (0.60) (1.22) (1.15)
RMW 0.013 0.011 -0.042 -0.040 -0.010 -0.010
(0.50) (0.44) (-1.52) (-1.47) (-0.36) (-0.35)
CMA -0.004 -0.006 0.028 0.030 -0.042 -0.042
(-0.11) (-0.17) (1.14) (1.22) (-1.02) (-1.09)
MOM 0.003 0.003 -0.003 -0.003 -0.004 0.000
(0.30) (0.32) (-0.33) (-0.31) (-0.33) (-0.01)
Adj.R2(%) 0.033 0.134 0.097 0.071 0.033 0.303 0.275 0.237 0.500 0.461 0.544 0.521 0.490 0.595 0.550
Panel B: Information Discreteness (TVC included)
Small Medium Large
Intercept 0.576 0.519 0.499 0.614 0.598 0.239 0.245 0.296 0.570 0.574 -0.496 -0.524 -0.396 -0.245 -0.209
(0.43) (0.38) (0.37) (0.45) (0.44) (0.22) (0.22) (0.27) (0.51) (0.51) (-0.41) (-0.43) (-0.31) (-0.19) (-0.16)
Market -0.011 -0.004 -0.004 -0.008 -0.008 -0.009 -0.006 -0.006 -0.014 -0.014 0.001 0.012 0.010 0.004 0.004
(-0.92) (-0.29) (-0.27) (-0.54) (-0.54) (-1.16) (-0.63) (-0.74) (-1.39) (-1.39) (0.06) (1.07) (1.02) (0.44) (0.46)
SMB 0.035 0.035 0.032 0.031 0.010 0.011 0.004 0.004 0.047** 0.051** 0.040** 0.044**
(1.06) (0.99) (1.03) (0.93) (0.45) (0.49) (0.21) (0.22) (2.50) (2.55) (2.25) (2.35)
HML 0.004 0.006 0.004 0.008 -0.019 -0.023 -0.028 -0.028 -0.023 -0.033 -0.029 -0.038
(0.21) (0.26) (0.16) (0.29) (-1.16) (-1.36) (-1.30) (-1.21) (-0.94) (-1.11) (-0.97) (-1.08)
RMW -0.010 -0.013 -0.055 -0.055 -0.042 -0.035
(-0.27) (-0.37) (-1.49) (-1.55) (-1.12) (-1.01)
CMA -0.021 -0.025 -0.033 -0.032 -0.039 -0.029
(-0.45) (-0.58) (-1.25) (-1.18) (-1.22) (-1.02)
MOM 0.003 0.006 -0.007 -0.001 -0.018 -0.013
(0.17) (0.39) (-0.67) (-0.13) (-1.15) (-0.95)
TVF 3.288*** 3.297*** 3.297*** 3.297*** 3.297*** 2.913*** 2.917*** 2.917*** 2.918*** 2.918*** 3.390*** 3.400*** 3.402*** 3.399*** 3.401***
(26.00) (28.42) (28.44) (28.65) (28.55) (57.31) (56.98) (56.66) (55.91) (55.84) (80.94) (81.51) (81.41) (81.16) (81.37)
Adj.R2(%) 58.732 58.793 58.776 58.757 58.744 71.126 71.138 71.136 71.214 71.201 71.604 71.796 71.844 71.816 71.834
In this table, we examine the Fama-French factor exposure of equally-weighted ITSM within groups by information discreteness (Da et al. (2014)). Panel A reports
the regression results where the equally-weighted ITSM within small, medium, and large information discreteness groups are regressed against the global market factor
(CAPM), global Fama-French 3 factors (FF3), global Fama-French 3 factors plus the (cross-sectional) momentum factor (FF3+MOM), global Fama-French 5 factors
(FF5), and global Fama-French 5 factors plus the momentum factor (FF5+MOM) respectively. In Panel B, we repeat the analyses with the time-varying factor (TVF,
for details see text) constructed and included as an additional regressor. The returns are annualized and in percentage. Newey and West (1987) t values are reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent the signiﬁcance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. The sample period spans from 04 October 2005 to 29 December 2017.
62