Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11156-024-01319-8

 ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Investor clientele and intraday patterns in the cross sec tion
of stock returns


Jian Chen1 · Ahmad Haboub2 · Ali Khan2 · Syed Mahmud3


Accepted: 20 June 2024
© The Author(s) 2024


Abstract
This paper examines the existence of a well documented (Heston et     al. in J Finance
65:1369–1407) (hereafter HKS 2010) intraday momentum pattern in the cross section of
stock returns for three previously un-examined markets outside the US—UK, China and
Brazil. While the stocks in UK and Brazil exhibit the pattern, the evidence from China is
lacklustre. We utlitlize the presence of dual listed A-shares (dominated by domestic retail
investors) and their B- and H-share counterparts (dominated by foreign institutional inves-
tors) of the same firms which provide a natural experiment setting to analyse the impact of
investor clientele on the proliferation of HKS (2010) pattern. Our findings indicate that pat-
tern is much weaker in A-shares (owned mostly by domestic retail investors) as compared
to their B- and H-share counterparts. As a further robustness test we examine the impact of
an exogenous shock that leads to an increase in institutional ownership namely the partial
index inclusion of A-shares in the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Emerging
Markets Index. Our findings indicate an increasing level of the manifestation of the intra-
day pattern upon inclusion of A-shares to the MSCI.

Keywords                                             Intraday momentum · Emerging markets · Investor composition · Limits of
arbitrage

JEL Classification                                                                        G11 · G15




*                                                    Jian Chen
Jian.Chen@nottingham.ac.uk
                                                 Ahmad Haboub
Ahmad.Haboub@northampton.ac.uk
                                                 Ali Khan
Ali.Khan@northampton.ac.uk
                                                 Syed Mahmud
s.mahmud1@aston.ac.uk

1                                      Department of Finance, Risk and Banking, Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham
     University, C-23, South Building, Jubilee Campus, Nottingham, UK
2                                      Accounting and Finance Division, Faculty of Business and Law, Northampton NN1 5PH, UK

3                                      Finance and Entrepreneurship Division, Aston Business School, Economics, Aston St,
     Birmingham B4 7ET, UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

“China is opening up faster than most people believe or think. We do not see any regres-
sion of that. If anything, we see a speeding up.1”
      (Henr y Fernandez, CEO, Morgan Stanley Capital International.)
      “The mainland China stock market is mostly owned by retail investors, so it is very
driven by sentiment. Those retail investors are really worried about trade wars, so this for-
eign investment will help institutionalize the market and slowly make it more dominated by
professional investors.2”
      (Brendan Ahern, CEO, KraneShares MSCI China A Shares ETF.)


1Introduction

The seminal study by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) documents positive returns on momen-
tum strategies in the US for the holding periods of 3- to 12-months. This form of conven-
tional momentum has since been widely documented in various studies across the world
(see Rouwenhorst 1999; Jegadeesh and Titman 2001; Griffin et   al. 2003). While momen-
tum is pervasive across markets and several asset classes (Daniel and Moskowitz 2016)
and provides a large magnitude return of 12 % in the US and Europe (Chui et   al. 2010)
there is still a noteworthy exception-China. The Chinese markets demonstrate poor per-
formance of the conventional momentum strategy as demonstrated by studies such as Pan
et  al. (2013) and Gao et  al. (2021). Also, since the US and China are the two largest mar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
kets in the world, this difference in their momentum patterns attracts a lot of interest from
global investors (Ma et al. 2024).
      Technological3 and structural4 advancements in financial markets in a HFT trading
world have brought about a revolution (O’hara 2015) and have enabled investors to for                                                                                                          -
mulate high frequency momentum strategies ranging from few hours to few days. With
the increasing availability of intraday data, focus has turned to studying high frequency
momentum. Initially, we witnessed a flurry of intraday momentum studies focusing on the
US markets (see for example Renault 2017 and Gao et  al. 2018) which soon led to studies
focusing on Chinese markets. The exponential rise of the Chinese economy5 and the eleva-
tion of its status as the world’s second most valuable stock market6 only behind the US in
terms of market capitalisation, but ahead of the US in terms of new initial public offerings
in recent times (Qian et   al. 2024)it has been the focus of attention by international inves-
tors (Carpenter et    al. 2021.Hence, there has been increased interest in studying intraday
momentum in Chinese markets.


1     See Bloomberg article https:// www. bloom berg. com/ news/ artic les/ 2019- 02- 28/ msci- chief- ferna ndez- says-
china- openi ng- faster- than- some- think                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
2 See                                               https:// www. cnbc. com/ 2018/ 08/ 31/ msci- adds- more- mainl and- china- stocks- a- shares- to- its- index                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 es.
html.
3     Riordan and Storkenmaier (2012) suggest that improvements in exchange technology have enabled trad-
ers to receive feedback on their orders quicker, thereby reducing latency, increasing liquidity, and decreas-
ing transaction costs.
4       Brogaard et al. (2014) and references therein, suggest that high frequency trading (HFT) and Algorithmic
Trading (AT) have changed the landscape and enhanced price efficiency and market quality, with HFT and
AT acting as liquidity providers and enabling smoother, faster transactions at lower costs.
5      Allen et  al. (2024) reports that Chinese GDP in 1980 was 11% of the US GDP in constant dollars as per
IMF, but in 2018 China was 23% larger than the US economy in terms of the purchasing power parity.
6    see for example Yao et   al. (2022), Ma et   al. (2024), Sehgal et   al. (2024) and Chen et   al. (2024) report
China as the second largest stock market.
    Jin et al. (2020) find that the first half hour of returns predict the last half hour of returns
for four Chinese commodity markets namely—copper, steel, soyabean and soyabean meal
futures. Gao et   al. (2019) find intraday momentum in stocks such that the first half hour
of returns positively predict the last half hour of daily returns. Limkriangkrai et  al. (2023)
document intraday momentum effect for ETFs in China. Our study is linked to other stud-
ies of high frequency momentum in China as we look for evidence of the existence of the
HKS (2010) in Chinese markets. We observe that the HKS (2010) pattern is much weaker
in China as compared to the other two markets that we study—UK and Brazil. We also test
for existence of the pattern in the UK (developed market) and Brazil (developing market)
to provide further out of sample evidence on the existence of the HKS (2010) intraday
momentum patterns. It is also to ensure that the non-existence of the pattern in China is not
merely due to factors such as academic attention which tends to weaken the proliferation of
existing effects and anomalies (Shanaev and Ghimire 2021).
    In contrast to the US markets,7 the Chinese markets are dominated by individual retail
investors with an average age of 50 years and poor education and they exhibit speculative
trading (characterized by the highest turnover ratios in the world) and are subject to vari-
ous regulatory constraints (Pan et  al. 2015). Kong et  al. (2017) provide further support to
the findings of Pan et   al. (2015) and postulate that the unusually high turnover of around
500 percent alludes to the highly speculative or ’gambling’ nature of investors in China.
Furthermore, even the most sophisticated investors and analysts regard the Chinese stock
market as a “casino" who blame the “erratic and irrational" behaviour on the individual
retail investors.8
    China’s structural differences make it an ideal laboratory to study the HKS (2010) effect.
Chinese stock market’s unique share class structure which is split into A-, B- and H-shares
with the presence of dual listed shares provides us with an opportunity to delineate the role
that investor clientele plays in the effect’s proliferation. In this study, we examine the HKS
(2010) intraday momentum pattern in the cross-section of stock returns for the main Chi-
nese share sub-classes namely the A-shares (available under QFII and RQFII quota restric-
tions to foreign investors), B-shares (available to foreign investors without restrictions) and
H-shares(listed in Hong Kong but available to domestic investors through the stock connect
program).
    Figure 1 shows that the intraday momentum pattern in the cross-section of stock returns
is relatively weaker in the all A-shares sample compared to the UK (chosen due to its size)
and Brazil (chosen because it is an emerging market). We attribute these findings to the
retail investor dominated markets of China. This study offers a unique opportunity to study
the impact of investor composition on the proliferation of the intraday momentum pattern
in the cross-section of stock returns. Table 1 highlights the unique features of China’s vari-
ous shares sub-classes.
    We exploit the dual listed A- and B-shares and the dual listed A- and H-shares as
these stocks have the same balance sheets and cash flows and only differ in terms of
ownership-individual versus foreign/institutional investors. Also, the dual-listed
A-shares are different from their H-share counterparts since the Hong Kong stock




7       According to Borochin and Yang (2017) institutional ownership in the United States has risen immensely
over the past 30 years and in the 2010s, on average every firm had 65 percent institutional ownership.
8        This is according to an interview with Jing Ulrich, Vice Chairman for Asia Pacific with JP Morgan Chase
Bank. See: https:// www. cnbc. com/ 2016/ 01/ 08/ jpmor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  gan- heres- what- china- needs- to- stabi lize. html and an
article published in the Economist which suggests that the Chinese stock market is often referred to as a
casino See: https:// www. econo mist. com/ free- excha nge/ 2015/ 05/ 26/a- crazy- casino.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.












































Fig.1                                         Manifestation of the intraday pattern across various markets

market doesn’t constitute the same level of limits of arbitrage in terms of price lim-
its and day trading rules as do the Chinese markets (see Gu et   al. 2018). The Chinese
A-shares are often exploited by researchers to unravel the impact that their idiosyncra-
sies have on various momentum anomalies (Ouyang et  al. 2024). Figures                                                                                                                                                              2 and    3 show
the findings for dual-listed B-shares and H-shares respectively. These dual-listed B- and
H-shares show greater strength of the pattern than their A-share counterparts. The dif-
ference in the strength of the momentum pattern is even higher for the H-shares and
their A-share counterparts because the H-shares provide lower limits of arbitrage which
are even more desirable for institutional investors. These findings are consistent with
studies in the past such as Kaniel et  al. (2008). They find that individual investors have
a tendency to take a contrarian strategy as opposed to a momentum strategy typical of
institutions and mutual funds (Grinblatt et   al.                       1995). Our findings further support the
findings of Baltzer et    al. (2019) who study the entire German stock market and find
that foreign investors and financial institutions, particularly mutual funds investors are
momentum investors whereas, individual investors are contrarians.
       The reforms carried out by Chinese policymakers and regulators paved the way for a
landmark event. On June 1, 2018 Morgan Stanley Capital International(MSCI hereafter)
Table1                                                                                         Comparison of salient features of various share classes across China

Type                                                                           Exchange                                                                                                             Primary owners                         Domestic/For-Price limits                         Intraday trading                         Currency
                                                                                                                              eign

A-shares                          Shanghai/Shen-                              Individuals                                                                                     Domestic                                                                                                             Ye  s                                                                                                                             Not allowed                                                                          RMB
                                  zen
B-shares                           Shanghai/Shen-                             Institutional                                                                           Foreign                                                                                                                                     Ye  s                                                                                                                             Not allowed                                                                          USD/HKD
                                  zen
H-shares                         Hong Kong                                                                                    Institutional                                                                           Foreign                                                                                                                                     No                                                                                                                                      Allowed                                                                                                                         HKD

This table reports salient features of various share classes such as investor composition and trading regula-
tions across them. It also outlines who are allowed to own the stocks as China places various restrictions on
different share classes










































Fig.2                                         Relative strength of the intraday pattern in dual listed B-shares


initiated its first phase of including China’s A-shares into its Emerging Markets Index. This
was then followed by the second phase of inclusion on September 1, 2018 of what analysts
believe to be a multi-year plan to increase the weight of A-shares by MSCI in its Emerging
Markets Index. The index is followed by active and passive managers controlling assets
worth 1.6 trillion US Dollars and some analysts are forecasting a net inflow of upto 600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.












































Fig.3                                         Relative strength of the pattern in A-shares and their H-share counterparts

billion US Dollars into the Chinese A-shares over the next five to ten years after one hun-
dred percent inclusion is achieved.9
          While these reforms have led to the partial inclusion of A-shares in the Emerging
Markets Index by MSCI, there are investors who are optimistic and some are sceptic of
the impact of partial inclusion of A-shares into the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and
will not be influenced by it in terms of their stock picking                          10. We shed more light on the
impact of index inclusion on the 233 A-shares and show that institutional ownership,
percentage of float held by institutions, number of institutions holding the stocks and
foreign ownership all four measures show an increase post inclusion. Other studies such
as Cortina et al. (2024) have also shown a rise in foreign ownership of Chinese A-shares



9   The 600 billion USD figure has been estimated by Steven Sun, head of research at HSBC Qianhai, a
Shenzhen-based securities company. This article can be found at https:// www. ft. com/ conte nt/ 3ea51 148-
632f- 11e8- a39d- 4df18 8287ff                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f
10  Nicholas Yeo from Aberdeen Standard Investments sees no immediate effect of the inclusion on his
investment picks. Eric Brian from JP Morgan Asset Management views the move as largely symbolic and
sees no impact on the firm’s approach to stock picking and portfolio selection. See: https:// www. bloom berg.
com/ news/ artic les/ 2019- 03- 01/ msci-s- latest- china- call- posit ive- but- mostly- symbo lic- analy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sts
Fig.4                                         The impact of index inclusion

post MSCI inclusion. The changes in key variables of institutional ownership are shown
in Table        11. Institutional holdings rise from 49 percent before inclusion to 55 percent
after inclusion. The percentage of float held by institutions rises from 18 percent to 29
percent. The institutional base in terms of the number of institutions owning or trading
the stocks has risen to 150 from a pre-inclusion level of 100. Also, domestic ownership
declined by 2 percent and made way for an increase in foreign ownership.
   We use the exogenous increase in institutional ownership as a result of MSCI Emerg-
ing Markets index inclusion of 233 A-shares to further study its impact on the intra-
day momentum pattern in the cross-section of stock returns. MSCI inclusion of Chinese
A-shares has attracted massive interest and studies like Li et al. (2024a) show that MSCI
inclusion has reduced implicit market barriers for foreign investors which has attracted
them to A-shares and led to greater market integration. The results of the impact of
inclusion in the index are depicted in Fig.                      4. We observe that following the inclusion in
the MSCI Emerging Markets Index, the 233 A-shares exhibit the intraday momentum
with greater strength and point to the importance of institutional investors in explain-
ing the intraday momentum in the cross-section of stock returns. This provides further
evidence as to the impact of institutionalization on prevalence of the pattern and also
further re-enforces our initial findings which differ between all A-shares and the UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.









































Fig.5                                         The impact of size on intraday momentum


and China as well as between A-shares and their dual listed B-share and H-share coun-
terparts. These findings are consistent with Nofsinger and Sias (1999). They show that
herding and feed back trading by institutional investors is more effective in leading to
the momentum effect as compared to that by individual investors.
       Li and Wang (2010) show that institutional investors in China have a tendency to pick
large stocks and concentrate their daily trades in large market cap stocks. Therefore, we
turn our focus to the impact of size on the propensity with which the intraday momentum
pattern propagates. Figure 5 shows the dispersion of the intraday momentum pattern across
small, medium and large stocks. We classify the all A-shares sample into small, medium
and large stocks based on size terciles. Our regression results indicate that the pattern is
strongest in large stocks and weakest in small stocks. This confirms findings of Li and
Wang (2010) and further re-enforces the fact that the pattern is weaker in Chinese A-shares
due to a lower level of institutional holdings and more active participation by retail inves-
tors.Furthermore, Campbell et  al. (2009) lend support to our findings of relatively weaker
presence of the intraday momentum pattern in our study as they point to the highly persis-
tent trading behaviour of institutions in daily trading which is a pre-requisite for the intra-
day momentum effect that we are studying.
   This study goes further beyond just examining the existence of the HKS (2010) pat-
tern in the Chinese stock market. We now focus on half-hour trading intervals which are
not exact half-hour multiples of a trading day, but are actually within the trading day and
extend this to all intervals for up to three trading days. This allows us to study the mar-
kets for any patterns that may arise therein and that may shed more light on the Chinese
retail investor’s trading preferences. Our findings indicate the presence of a strong reversal
pattern during the first three half-hour intervals immediately after the passing of 24-hour
period or a whole trading day for up to two days in a row. These findings re-enforce the
contrarian nature of retail investors that has been previously documented in the literature
(Kaniel et al. 2008. It shows that retail investors place contrarian trades that are predictable
and their holding periods are just over 24-hour and point to the day trading rule as playing
a role in their behaviour. This is not the case for the UK markets which demonstrate no
such reversals just beyond the daily trading lag.
   In addition, when we run the regression for half-hour returns on intraday lags within the
trading day, we notice that short-term return reversals last for 0 to 30  minutes for Chinese
markets and they last for 0 to 30  minutes for the UK market as well. However, the regres-
sion estimate and t-statistics are higher for the Chinese markets. This shows that Chinese
markets as a whole are somewhat less efficient than the UK markets. These findings are
consistent with Chordia et al. (2005) who find that it takes between 30 to 60 minutes for the
US markets to become efficient but their sample period ends in 2002.
   Gao et    al. (2018) discuss various reasons such as macroeconomic news releases and
high volumes of trading activity owing to portfolio adjustments that make the opening and
closing half-hour intervals particularly important. Our cross-sectional regression results
also indicate that the Heston et al. (2010) pattern is mainly concentrated in the first- and the
last half-hour of the trading day for Chinese markets. This is in contrast with the findings
of Heston et  al. (2010) who document the presence of the pattern throughout the day. The
findings provide further support to the impact of index inclusion on the Chinese A-shares
as mostly indexers are most active during the opening and closing half-hour intervals of the
trading day (Gao et al. 2018).
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect.     2, we dicuss the related
literature. Section  3 discusses the data and methodology. Section                     4 provides the empirical
findings and the discussion. Finally, Sect. 5 offers a conclusion to the paper.



2                             Literature           review

Our study is linked to two strands of literature. The first strand of literature is based on
studies which attempt to study evidence linked to momentum patterns documented in the
US and the non-US markets.The interest in momentum studies stems from the fact that
momentum strategy profits could be as high as 12% in the US and Europe as reported by
Chui et al. (2010). Heston and Sadka (2008) initially found that seasonality exists for indi-
vidual stocks in the cross-section of returns for the same calendar month for a period of up
to twenty years. Heston and Sadka (2010) find that a stock that outperforms the broader
market in a particular month continues to outperform in that same particular month over
the next 5 years and provide international evidence of the pattern in Canada, Japan and 12
European markets. Li et  al. (2018) study the Heston and Sadka (2008) seasonality pattern
for 42 advanced and emerging markets between 1995 to 2013 and conclude that return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

seasonality is economically significant primarily in advanced markets but not in emerging
markets.
     HKS (2010) was the first study to provide empirical evidence on the existence of intra-
day patterns in the cross-section of stock returns. The pattern can be interpreted as an intra-
day momentum phenomenon that leads to significant predictability in daily (24-h) multi-
ples of each half-hour interval returns, during the trading day; for up to forty trading days
in a row. To put it into perspective, the returns on a stock today between 1:00 to 1:30 pm
exhibit momentum over the same interval for up to forty trading days in a row.
     Our study is related to several other studies that examine the momentum effect at rela-
tively longer horizons (see Chui et    al. 2010,                                                                                                                                      2022) in Chinese markets and other inter                                                                          -
national markets beyond the United States. However, to our best knowledge, this is the
first study that examines the HKS (2010) intraday momentum in the cross-section of stock
returns beyond the US market. International evidence on any momentum pattern observed
in the US is significant as it provides out-of-sample evidence (Heston and Sadka 2010) and
also gives external validity to the existence of the anomaly solely observed in a particular
market (Cakici et    al. 2023). Hence, our study makes a major contribution by being the
first to test HKS (2010) beyond the US market in three markets-China (emerging market),
UK(developed market) and Brazil(emerging market).
     The second strand of literature that our study is linked to is the role that institutional
investors play in financial markets. Chui et   al. (2022) go as far as calling the segmented
Chinese market with A- and B-shares as an /uni2032.varideal laboratory                                               /uni2032.var for studying the vary                                  -
ing impacts of investor composition on the momentum effect. Institutional investors are
believed to have various desirable impacts on financial markets. For instance, institutional
investors reduce firm mis-valuation (Borochin and Yang 2017), increase innovation output
(Bena et    al. 2017), improve long-run performance (Appel et    al. 2016) and reduce infor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
mation asymmetry (Boone and White 2015) among various others. More specifically, an
empirical study on the Chinese markets by Tian et  al. (2018) finds that institutional inves-
tors provide stability to the market by reducing the impact of extreme swings.
     Chui et al. (2022) highlight how dual listed A- and B-class shares of some Chinese firms
allow us to differentiate between their momentum patterns based on their unique clienteles
as both the share classes essentially have the same cash flows. Furthermore, Chui et    al.
(2022) elaborate and attribute clientele differences in dual listed A- and B-class shares to
three exogenous features in Chinese financial markets-currency regulations restrict domes-
tic investors from participating in purchase of B-shares (settled in USD or HKD), foreign
institutions are restricted by regulatory quotas to invest in A-shares and the inability of
domestic institutions to be able to purchase B-shares making all B-shares institutional own-
ership foreign.
     Luo et   al. (2023) show that retail investors are mostly contrarian traders(who facilitate
return reversals rather than producing momentum) by utilizing trader specific data from a
large panel of US brokerage accounts. On the other hand, (Chui et  al. 2022) postulate that
momentum arises due to the under-reaction of active investors to fundamental information.
The hypothesis that active investors under-react to fundamental information and therefore
drive momentum, is confirmed by the baseline momentum results for B-shares obtained
by (Chui et  al. 2022) that are dominated by foreign institutional investors (who are active
investors) but not noise traders and hence under-react to fundamental information thereby
allowing a pattern of returns to continue and produce momentum. Furthermore, they also
provide evidence that the post-earnings drift is only found in B-shares further confirm-
ing the conjecture that active foreign institutional investors under-react to fundamental
information. Foreign institutional investors are known to be more sophisticated than retail
investors who are considered novice therefore, the clienteles of A-shares are dominated by
more noise traders than their dual listed B-share counterparts dominated by active investors
who under-react to fundamental information and refrain from undertaking contrarian strat-
egies (Chui et al. 2022).
   Given the importance of institutional investors, Chinese policymakers and regulators
have been steadfast to make the necessary reforms to attract institutional investors. The
main reforms can be chronologically summarized as follows-capital mobility restrictions
were eased by relaxing rules on Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (hereafter QFII)
repatriation (2013), launching of Shanghai connect11 (2014), tremendous alleviation of
uncertainties regarding the capital gains tax (2014), tightening of rules on stock trading
suspensions(2016), QFII and Renminbi Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (here-
after RQFII) quotas linked to fund size (2016), beneficiary ownership rules made more
investor friendly and transparent(2016), Shenzen connect launched in 2016 and an eas-
ing of requirements that previously restricted creation of index-linked investment prod-
ucts(2017)12. These attempts to liberalize the stock markets and open them up to foreign
investors has led to significant increase in investment and capital inflows (Li et al. 2024b).
   HKS (2010) identify two potential reasons for this seasonality in return predictabil-
ity namely—high auto-correlations in institutional fund flows and algorithmic trading.
Bogousslavsky (2021) further study the HKS (2010) pattern and find evidence that clien-
tele effects drive the pattern. To study the impact of institutional fund flows and investors
on the HKS (2010) we further use an exogenous shock to insitutional fund flows that came
through the inclusion of some Chinese stocks in the MSCI index as evident in Table    11.
MSCI index inclusion has also been used to study the impact of increase in institutional
funds flows on price efficiency by Jiao et al. (2024). Therefore, this study uses MSCI index
inclusion (which led to a significant increase in institutional ownership) on the strength
of the HKS (2010) intraday momentum pattern. In doing so, this study contributes to the
existing literature and allows the policymakers to understand the impact of changes that
allowed the incorporation of Chinese stocks in MSCI index. The second major contribu-
tion of this study is that it demonstrates the positive impact that MSCI index inclusion
has on the included shares that start to behave like developed market shares which have a
high percentage of institutional investors and exhibit a much stronger HKS (2010) intraday
momentum pattern.
   Various studies that have been conducted to examine the presence of the momentum
effect in China have also attempted to provide potential explanations for the absence of the
effect in China. For instance, Chui et   al. (2010) demonstrate cultural differences explain
the weaker presence of momentum in Asian emerging markets including China. Yao et  al.
(2022) demonstrate that individual investor preferences play a large role in the diminishing
of the momentum effect in China. We make an incremental contribution to the understand-
ing of the factors hampering the momentum effect in China by controlling for price limits
and day trading rule which according to Gao et al. (2018) cause trading frictions and create
barriers to executing intraday trades particularly in short time windows of up to 24 h. This
provides further evidence on the role that limits of arbitrage (henceforth LOA) play in the
manifestation of intraday momentum effects in China.




11    Stock connect programs facilitate traders between mainland China and Hong Kong stock exchanges to
trade seamlessly using local brokers.
12      These reforms have been summarized in a report by Ching Ping Chia, MSCI Head of Research for Asia
Pacific which is the source of this information. See: https:// www. msci. com/ www/ blog- posts/ the- world-
comes- to- china/ 01002 067599.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

     This study intends to answer several unanswered questions not previously examined by
researchers. In doing so, we intend to make several important contributions to the exist-
ing body of literature. First, we examine if the HKS (2010) momentum pattern found for
the US also exists in non-US markets. This question is particularly important as previous
studies such as Heston and Sadka (2010) and Chui et   al. (2010) have explained that any
international evidence on the existence and profitability of a momentum effect serves as a
robustness check to the existence of the momentum pattern within the United States as well
as providing an opportunity to study the pattern in light of country-specific characteristics.
     The second major contribution we make is provide evidence on the impact of investor
clientele on intraday momentum patterns. Our study provides complementary evidence to
the findings by Chui et  al. (2022) who demonstrate that B-shares of dual listed firms dem-
onstrate stronger momentum patterns over the long horizon. However, our study uses the
HKS (2010) intraday momentum pattern to study the impact of investor clientele. Moreo-
ver, we also use dual listed A- and H-shares and an exogenous shock to investor composi-
tion stemming from inclusion of some A-shares in the MSCI index.
     The third contribution that comes to light is that we show that price limits and day trad-
ing rule where are a form of LOA and unique to the highly regulated Chinese market play
a role in hampering the intraday momentum effect. This helps in demonstrating the various
impacts that price limits and other LOA have on Chinese markets. Also, not only do we
demonstrate weak presence of the HKS (2010) intraday momentum pattern in China, we
also highlight the potential channels hampering the prominence of the pattern in China.
This study provides additional evidence on the factors that explain the absence of the
momentum effect in China.



3                             Data           and methodology

Two distinct databases have been used to collect all the data required. The high-frequency
intraday trading data is collected from Bloomberg. We use Bloomberg to collect data for
China, the UK and Brazil in order to compare the Chinese market results with a well-devel-
oped UK market and another developing BRIC country, the Brazilian market. The appro-
priate Bloomberg data collection screening filter is used to screen out common stocks that
are traded in the domestic currency and are domiciled within the country. The exception
to this rule is the collection of data for B-shares which are traded in US Dollars and Hong
Kong Dollars and not in the domestic currency. Also, for the Chinese dual-listed H-shares
we consider the shares even though they are traded outside mainland China on the Hong
Kong stock exchange.
     For China, this data is then classified as A-shares, B-shares or dual-listed in Hong Kong
as H-shares and as B-shares in either Shanghai or Shenzen. This is done through the firm
classification data collected from The China Stock Market and Accounting Research data-
base (CSMAR). CSMAR is widely used by researchers and there are no reports of dis-
crepancies in share classifications i.e., A-, B-shares or dual-listed in Hong Kong and China
and also no classification errors are known to date. The final sample contains all firms for
which the data can be matched from CSMAR and to further avoid inclusion of exchange
traded funds, preference shares, bonds etcetera we manually check and verify the Interna-
tional Securities Identification Number (ISIN) of each and every security to ensure only
equity listings are included in the dataset.
   To study intraday patterns in the cross-section of stock returns, following the method-
ology of Heston and Sadka (2010) all firms that can be matched on both Bloomberg and
CSMAR are considered. We follow Fong et  al. (2017)’s methodology to apply specific fil-
ters to match trades with quotes and leave out potentially spurious observations such as
those with negative spreads (where bids are higher than asks), zero or negative volume, and
those conducted outside regular market trading hours. This will ensure that our results are
not driven by spurious observations. Also, the data from Bloomberg is considered to have a
high correlation with the Thomson Reuters Tick History (TRTH) database. The correlation
is known to be as high as 99.19% (Fong et   al. 2017). This should alleviate any concerns
about the accuracy of data obtained from Bloomberg.
   Our primary sample period for all Chinese, UK and Brazilian stocks starts on June 1,
2016 and ends on March 1, 2019. The sample period is divided into two periods before
June 1, 2018 and after June 1, 2018 for the 232 A-shares that were included in the Morgan
Stanley Capital International (MSCI) index for Emerging markets beginning from 1st June,
2018. This is done to study the impact of index inclusion on the intraday pattern exhibited
by the included stocks.
   We begin by providing summary statistics of the sample of stocks that we consider for
the UK, Brazil, and China. For China the sample is sub-divided into three parts A-shares
only, dual-listed A- and B-shares, and dual-listed A-shares and H-shares in Table    1. The
total number of firms considered for the UK and Brazil are 1457 and 365 respectively. For
China, there are 3238 firms listed as A-shares. The number of dual-listed A and B-shares
is 84 and the number of dual-listed A and H-shares is 87. Table  2 also provides summary
statistics of half-hour returns for the sample.



3.1                                                                           Description of variables used throughout the paper

1.R: These returns are calculated using the last trading price at the end of each half-hour
interval less the opening price at the beginning of the interval divided by the opening price
as calculated by HKS (2010).
   2.      MPR( Midpoint Returns): These returns are calculated for the interval t using the
average of the bid-ask prices at the end of interval t      −        1 and the average of the bid-ask
prices at the end of interval t. The difference between the two is divided by the average of
the bid-ask prices at the end of interval t      −        1 to obtain the midpoint returns.


3.2                            Methodology

Our aim in this study is to examine the existence of an intraday pattern in Chinese Markets
as observed by HKS (2010) and modelled by Bogousslavsky (2016). These two studies
examine and model a continuation pattern in the cross section of stock returns at 24-hour
multiples for each trading interval between 8:00 am to 4:30 pm on the NYSE considering
a sample of all NYSE firms. The pattern is studied using the cross sectional regression
approach following the footsteps of Jegadeesh (1990) and further checking the statistical
significance of the estimates by incorporating Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics.
   While the cross-sectional regression approach is the first step in examining the existence
of the return continuation pattern at integer multiples of the trading day for each half-hour
interval, a second method is employed by HKS (2010) to study the economic significance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table2                                                                                         Summary statistics

Country                                           Type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Number of Stocks                                           Mean Market Cap                                           Mean Returns                                           Standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Billions)                                                                                                                                                        (Basis Points)Deviation

China                                                                        A-shares (All)                                                                                                                                         3238                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17.25                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.008                                                                                                                                                       0.007
China                                                                        A-shares (small)                                                                                                             1079                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.40                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.010                                                                                                                                                       0.009
China                                                                        A-shares (medium)                                                                         1079                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6.78                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.009                                                                                                                                                       0.008
China                                                                        A-shares (large)                                                                                                                   1080                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40.32                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.007                                                                                                                                                       0.006
China                                                                        B-shares (dual-listed)                                                                           84                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10.25                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.006                                                                                                                                                       0.006
China                                                                        H-shares (dual-listed)                                                                         87                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15.12                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.007                                                                                                                                                       0.008
UK                                                                                                      Common stock                                                                                                                               1457                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.67                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.006                                                                                                                                                       0.009
Brazil                                                                      Common stock                                                                                                                                             365                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.62                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.007                                                                                                                                                       0.008

This table reports the number of stocks from each category which are included in our sample based on the
criteria of atleast 50 trades every year. It also reports the mean market capitalization for each category. IThe
mean returns for the thirty minute interval in basis points and their standard deviation in percentage is also
reported



of the pattern in line with Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). They sort the portfolios into top
(best) and bottom (worst) performing deciles sorted every half-hour. These top and bot-
tom deciles are then composed into a portfolio where the top decile stocks are bought and
bottom decile stocks are shorted during the same half-hour interval for the next forty days.
The net return on the strategy turns out to be economically and statistically significant for
the next forty days as found by HKS (2010). They show that on the first day the strategy
earns a mean return of 3.01 basis points which is enough to offset the equity premium. In
our study, we employ the same techniques as employed by HKS (2010). We sort the stocks
based on their half-hour returns into top and bottom deciles with an equal number of stocks
in each decile. These stocks are then held on for the next forty days during the correspond-
ing 24-hour multiple of the interval in question. The trading day is slightly shorter in the
Chinese markets and we end up with 8 half hour intervals from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then
1:00 pm to 3:00 pm post lunch break.
                                                                                                                  MPR                 i,t     =          /u1D6FCk,t   +         /u1D6FDk,tMPR                    i,t−k      +             /u1D716i,t                                                                                                       (1)

Where     t is the collection of all half-hour intervals for which the stock trades during the
sample period, for China this leads to 8 half-hour intervals from 9:30–11:30 am and from
1:00 to 3:00 pm; respectively. R          i,t                                                                                        is the return on the stock of firm            i in interval           t and                                                                                                                                   R         i,t  −k
is the return on the stock of firm i lagged by k intervals. k is multiple of 8 (which makes it
a lag equivalent to a whole trading day), it assumes values of 8, 16, 24, 32, 40,..., 312, and
320 for a daily lag of 1, 2, 3,4,..., 39 and 40 days.
           We first estimate mid-point returns based on the average of bid-ask prices for each half-
hour interval of the trading day for each market. We don’t use trade price returns to avoid
any potential bid-ask bounce effects. Most recently Hasbrouck (2018) has highlighted that
for intervals of up to 1    h, the trade price change may simply be the artifact of the bid-
ask bounce and also there is an issue with calculating the returns since the trades may
not necessarily be at precisely the beginning and the ending of a half-hour interval. Also,
as pointed out by HKS (2010), short-term return reversals that they find at lags less than
1 trading day are merely due to the bid-ask bounce. Since we intend to study short-term
return reversals as well, it is prudent that we choose mid-point returns to rule out the influ-
ence of the bid-ask bounce in our findings.
   We then run cross-sectional regressions of these half-hour interval returns on lagged
half-hour returns during the same daily interval for up to 40 days. The coefficients are then
averaged over time as per Fama and MacBeth (1973) approach. We further split the Chi-
nese stocks into Chinese A-shares, dual-listed A-shares and their B-share counterparts, and
Chinese A-shares and their dual-listed H-share counterparts. The Chinese A-shares are
open for investment to only domestic investors, the B-shares are open to both domestic and
foreign investors, and the H-shares are listed in Hong Kong. This segmentation leads to
significant differences in investor composition. The Chinese A-shares are characterized by
retail investor ownership (Nartea et  al. 2017). Whereas, the B-shares are primarily held by
foreign investors (Chui et  al. 2022). The main advantage is that there are some shares that
are dual-listed as A and B-shares. A summary of the salient features of all share classes of
interest in the Chinese markets is provided in Table 1.
   We perform the regression analyses explained above on both A-shares and their B-share
counterparts. Segregating the sample into dual-listed A- and B-shares provides an insight
into the role of investor composition in explaining the intraday momentum pattern of HKS
(2010). We now turn to segregating the sample into dual-listed A and H-share counter-
parts. This provides an avenue to study the impact of limits of arbitrage on the intraday
momentum pattern. We run cross-sectional regressions of current 30-minute (half-hour)
interval returns on returns during the same interval on previous days for up to 40 days and
then average the coefficients over time as per Fama and MacBeth (1973) approach. The
results indicate that the intraday momentum is much stronger in the H-shares as compared
to their A-share counterparts. This difference can be attributed to low limits of arbitrage in
the Hong Kong stock markets. They are not subject to limits of arbitrage such as price lim-
its and the day trading rule as is applicable to the Chinese markets.
   Initially, we consider all A-shares listed in Chinese Markets. We then segregate our
sample into dual-listed A-shares and dual-listed B-shares following Chui et al. (2022).Chui
et   al. (2022) find that the absence of momentum in the A-shares is due to differences in
investor composition as dual-listed B-shares with nearly the same features exhibit momen-
tum in returns much more profoundly than their A-share counterparts. This motivates us to
exploit this unique feature of the Chinese markets to study the differential impact of inves-
tor composition on intraday momentum. Furthermore, we split the sample into dual-listed
A-shares versus their H-listed counterparts. We find that the intraday momentum pattern is
far more profound in the H-shares market than in the corresponding A-shares market. We
can hence infer that investor composition as well as market regulations can play a major
role in explaining the differences in intraday momentum patterns as exhibited by these
‘twin’ shares.
   To investigate the impact of limits of arbitrage on the Chinese A-shares, we conduct
yet some more tests. We drop the stocks that traded in the top and bottom deciles for each
half-hour interval that are considered. This ensures that any stocks that hit the price limit
whether upper or lower or are likely to hit the higher or lower price limit are excluded.
When these stocks are removed, the strength of the intraday pattern in the Chinese A-shares
rises considerably based on the regression coefficients for the regression discussed above
in detail.
   Our analyses also involves analysing the intraday momentum pattern among the Chi-
nese A-shares market based on cross-sectional differences in stocks. The entire sample is
split into large, medium, and small stocks based on market capitalisation. There is no sig-
nificant difference in the pattern in terms of the regression coefficients obtained and size
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

doesn’t explain the pattern. Furthermore, motivated by the recent study Gao et   al. (2018)
who state that the first half hour and last half hour of trading are particularly important we
run another regressions as in HKS (2010) to check the concentration of the pattern in the
first and last half hours where the first and last half-hour intervals are dropped. The reason
cited by Gao et  al. (2018) for the significance of the first and last hour of trading are that-
important announcements are typically made during the first half hour of trading and insti-
tutional investors, mutual funds etcetera rebalance their portfolios during the last half hour
prior to market close.
     To further determine the economic significance and statistical significance of this pat-
tern for China, the UK, and Brazil we now turn to intraday momentum portfolio analyses
as conducted by HKS (2010). The performance for the portfolios formed on the basis of
each half-hour interval’s returns is tested. The stocks are sorted every half hour and port-
folios are formed using the top and bottom deciles and their half-hour returns are observed
for the next forty days (during the same half-hour interval). The average return spreads(top
minus bottom decile) on portfolios formed on the basis of the performance during the rel-
evant historical half-hour (with lags 1 to 40 days) interval are reported. The stocks are
grouped into ten portfolios with an equal number of stocks in each portfolio.
     We use alternative measures of returns such as trade, bid to bid, and ask to ask returns
as used by HKS (2010) and find that at the daily lag level, it doesn’t affect our results. The
only difference is that for lags close to k        =          1, the negative coefficients are observed beyond
one lag. This is in line with the findings of HKS (2010) who cite the bid-ask bounce as
the reason for finding negative coefficients using trade returns. Moreover, we use inter-
vals of 5-minutes to 60-minutes to see if a similar intraday pattern is prevalent for any of
these intervals and we find no evidence to believe that any other pattern of return continua-
tion beyond the half-hour interval exists. This alleviates concerns that our findings may be
driven by other effects that we may not have considered.


4                                     Empirical findings and discussion

4.1                                                                           Intraday return predictability based on previous day ’s return in the same half
        hour inter val

Our initial sample contains 3,238 A-shares listed on the Chinese stock exchanges from
June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. We report the regression results for the regression of each
trading interval from 9:30 to 11:30 am and from 1:00 to 3:00 pm (which makes a total of 8
daily trading intervals) on their lagged returns for lags of 8,16, 24,32,...,312 and 320 which
corresponds to daily lags of 1,2,3,4,..., 39 and 40. Like HKS (2010) we employ the cross
sectional regression approach applied by Jegadeesh (1990) and report the corresponding
Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics. The results are reported in Table 3.
     We observe that in general, the pattern is less profound in terms of both the estimates
and the t-statistics for the Chinese A-shares. To provide a sense of the magnitude of this
difference, the pattern as reported for a daily lag of 1 day is most profound for the U.S.
market as reported by HKS (2010) in their Table I, the estimate has a co-efficient of 1.19
and a t-statistic of 18.22. Whereas, our estimate for a daily lag of 1 day has an estimate
with a co-efficient of 0.36 and a t-statistic of 2.94. This is a very striking contrast as when
we look and compare the estimates for other lags up to forty days, we observe that for
the U.S. markets the highest report estimate and t-statistic is that for the daily lag of 1
Table3                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                                                                                                                         Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions of each half hour
interval returns on lagged returns                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     All Chinese A-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 Day                                                                      0.36                                                                                                                 2.94                                                                                             21 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 Days                                                          0.56                                                                                                                 4.25                                                                                             22 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3 Days                                                          0.65                                                                                                                 4.63                                                                                             23 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4 Days                                                          0.61                                                                                                                 4.43                                                                                             24 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5 Days                                                          0.54                                                                                                                 4.20                                                                                             25 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6 Days                                                          0.59                                                                                                                 4.34                                                                                             26 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  3.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7 Days                                                          0.57                                                                                                                 4.23                                                                                             27 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                  3.47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8 Days                                                          0.59                                                                                                                 4.32                                                                                             28 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9 Days                                                          0.63                                                                                                                 4.47                                                                                             29 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                  2.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 Days                                          0.64                                                                                                                 4.49                                                                                             30 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                                 3.44                                                                                             31 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 Days                                          0.61                                                                                                                 4.38                                                                                             32 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                                 3.11                                                                                             33 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                                 3.93                                                                                             34 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                                 3.80                                                                                             35 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                                 2.84                                                                                             36 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                                 3.31                                                                                             37 Days                                          0.25                                                                                                  2.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                                 3.50                                                                                             38 Days                                          0.23                                                                                                  2.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                                 2.93                                                                                             39 Days                                          0.26                                                                                                  2.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                                 3.54                                                                                             40 Days                                          0.23                                                                                                  2.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 Day                                                                      1.82                                                                                                  10.18                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  5.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 Days                                                          1.55                                                                                                                 8.73                                                                                             22 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  5.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 Days                                                          1.23                                                                                                                 8.07                                                                                             23 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  4.96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4 Days                                                          1.12                                                                                                                 7.71                                                                                             24 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  5.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5 Days                                                          1.05                                                                                                                 7.32                                                                                             25 Days                                          0.57                                                                                                  6.67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6 Days                                                          0.96                                                                                                                 6.88                                                                                             26 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  5.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7 Days                                                          0.89                                                                                                                 6.42                                                                                             27 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  5.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8 Days                                                          0.81                                                                                                                 6.07                                                                                             28 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  4.56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9 Days                                                          0.75                                                                                                                 5.87                                                                                             29 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  5.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 Days                                          0.72                                                                                                                 5.69                                                                                             30 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  5.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11 Days                                          0.68                                                                                                                 5.59                                                                                             31 Days                                          0.53                                                                                                  5.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 Days                                          0.63                                                                                                                 5.41                                                                                             32 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  4.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                                 4.89                                                                                             33 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  4.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14 Days                                          0.77                                                                                                                 5.45                                                                                             34 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                  3.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 Days                                          0.61                                                                                                                 5.22                                                                                             35 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  3.89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                                 4.84                                                                                             36 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  4.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                                 4.78                                                                                             37 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  3.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                                 4.70                                                                                             38 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                                 4.43                                                                                             39 Days                                          0.53                                                                                                  3.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 Days                                          0.53                                                                                                                 4.56                                                                                             40 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 Day                                                                      1.12                                                                                                                 7.22                                                                                             21 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  4.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 Days                                                          1.05                                                                                                                 6.53                                                                                             22 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  4.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 Days                                                          0.98                                                                                                                 6.12                                                                                             23 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  4.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table3(continued)                                                                                                                            Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic

                                                                                                                                             4 Days                                                          0.91                                                                                                                 5.97                                                                                             24 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  3.84
                                                                                                                                             5 Days                                                          0.85                                                                                                                 5.78                                                                                             25 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.92
                                                                                                                                             6 Days                                                          0.81                                                                                                                 5.64                                                                                             26 Days                                          0.39                                                                                                  3.80
                                                                                                                                             7 Days                                                          0.75                                                                                                                 5.48                                                                                             27 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                  3.62
                                                                                                                                             8 Days                                                          0.77                                                                                                                 5.65                                                                                             28 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  3.45
                                                                                                                                             9 Days                                                          0.74                                                                                                                 5.73                                                                                             29 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  3.83
                                                                                                                                             10 Days                                          0.72                                                                                                                 5.62                                                                                             30 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  4.23
                                                                                                                                             11 Days                                          0.65                                                                                                                 5.23                                                                                             31 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  4.17
                                                                                                                                             12 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                                 5.12                                                                                             32 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  3.44
                                                                                                                                             13 Days                                          0.58                                                                                                                 4.63                                                                                             33 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  3.40
                                                                                                                                             14 Days                                          0.64                                                                                                                 5.20                                                                                             34 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  3.42
                                                                                                                                             15 Days                                          0.59                                                                                                                 5.15                                                                                             35 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  3.23
                                                                                                                                             16 Days                                          0.52                                                                                                                 4.61                                                                                             36 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  3.31
                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                                 4.87                                                                                             37 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  3.40
                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                                 4.44                                                                                             38 Days                                          0.28                                                                                                  3.14
                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                                 4.38                                                                                             39 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  3.20
                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                                 4.29                                                                                             40 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  3.12

                                                                                                                                             This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                             sion                Ri,t      =             /u1D6FCi,t    +      /u1D6FDi,tR      i,t−k       +/u1D716i,t, where t is the collection of all half-
                                                                                                                                             hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period
                                                                                                                                             ranging from June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. R                                                                                                                                             i,t is the return on the
                                                                                                                                             stock of firm i in interval t and                                                                                         R     i,t−k is the return on the stock of firm
                                                                                                                                             i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trading on
                                                                                                                                             all exhanges in China and the sample is obtained by matching stocks
                                                                                                                                             common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The final
                                                                                                                                             sample contains 3238 firms.The trading day is divided in to non-over-
                                                                                                                                             lapping half-hour intervals, since the Chinese stock exchange operates
                                                                                                                                             from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-
                                                                                                                                             hour trading intervals each day. The cross-sectional regressions are
                                                                                                                                             estimated for all half-hour intervals in the time sample for lags k=8,
                                                                                                                                             16, 34, 96 and so on until 320 lags. These lags correspond to daily
                                                                                                                                             lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days.For the UK and Brazil, the trading day runs
                                                                                                                                             from 8:00 am to 4:30 pm and from 10:00 am to 5:55 pm respectively.
                                                                                                                                             The UK sample contains all 1457 firms and Brazil contains all 365
                                                                                                                                             firms. A procedure similar to that applied to the Chinese firms is fol-
                                                                                                                                             lowed for the UK as well as Brazil. The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,           t
                                                                                                                                             are reported in percentages as in HKS (2010). Also, the corresponding
                                                                                                                                             Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported along side

day. However, for the Chinese market it appears that the lowest estimate and corresponding
t-statistic is that for the lag of 1 day. The estimates for greater lags are somewhat compara-
ble in terms of statistical significance i.e. the t-statistics, but relatively weaker in terms of
economic significance i.e., the actual regression co-efficients.
             To add to the validity of our analyses and to provide a robustness check, we also include
the UK market (which is a large market outside the US like China) and Brazil (which is
another emerging market like China). As can be seen in Table 3, the regression coefficients
and relevant t-statistics showing the results for China are visibly smaller than that of the
UK and Brazil which are 1.82 (1.12) and 10.18 (7.22) for a lag of one trading day for UK
(Brazil) respectively.
   This finding can be simply interpreted as a very weak intraday momentum effect for a
daily lag of 1 day. However, contrary to the US, the UK, and Brazilian markets where the
effect is most profound for a daily lag of 1-day, it is the weakest for China. As the effect
tapers off with increasing lags of up to forty days, the effect in China seems to be more
stable beyond the first day. Unlike the US, the UK, and Brazil we see a peaking out of this
effect on the third trading day. This motivates us to study the factors that are essentially
curtailing this effect for a daily lag of 1-day.
   This finding contributes to the evidence provided by earlier studies such as Chui et   al.
(2022) which find a weaker prevalence of the momentum effect in Chinese A-shares. Also,
Li et al. (2018) study the Heston and Sadka (2008) seasonality pattern for 42 advanced and
emerging markets from 1995 to 2013 and conclude that return seasonality is economically
significant primarily in advanced markets but not in emerging markets. Furthermore, Chui
et   al. (2010) study the profitability of some long-term momentum strategies across inter                                                                                                                                         -
national markets and suggest that they generally underperform in Asian markets owing to
cultural differences in terms of the level of individualism.

4.2                                                                         The existence of intraday momentum in A‑shares versus B‑shares

The Chinese market offers a very unique opportunity to study the impact of investor com-
position as explained in detail by Chui et  al. (2022). Chui et  al. (2022) argue that the dual
listed stocks which have both A and B-shares trading in the market have essentially the
same type of features in terms of voting rights and cash flow rights but differ in investor
composition. The Chinese A-shares are owned by domestic investors the majority of whom
are retail investors versus B-shares that are held mostly by foreign investors who are mainly
sophisticated institutional investors.
   We only consider the sample of A-shares which have a corresponding listing of B-share
and are dual-listed. We end up with a sample of 84 dual-listed A- and B-shares. The results
for the cross-sectional regressions to examine the intraday pattern observed by HKS (2010)
are reported in Table        4. We observe that the regression co-efficient for the dual-listed
A-shares is somewhat better than the aggregate A-share sample. The estimate has a co-
efficient of 0.55 and a t-statistic of 2.85 for a daily lag of 1 day. Whereas, our dual-listed
B-share sample has an estimate with a co-efficient of 1.30 and a corresponding t-statistic
of 6.32. While both these estimates for the A-shares and B-shares have estimates that are
statistically much less significant than the U.S. estimate which had a t-statistic of 18.22 for
the first daily lag, it is evident that B-shares clearly demonstrate a higher alignment with
the US markets in terms of exhibiting this pattern.
   Interestingly, Chui et  al. (2022) also find that the momentum effect for longer horizons
is more prevalent in B-shares compared to A-shares. They use this evidence to arrive at the
conclusion that since the only significant difference between dual-listed A- and B-shares is
investor composition, it is plausible to say that it is the difference in investor composition
that determines the existence of the momentum effect. Our findings, support and comple-
ment their findings by providing evidence that even very short-term momentum effect at
the intraday level is much stronger in the B-shares as compared to A-shares and provides
further support for the argument that it is indeed investor composition that explains why
the momentum effect is not very strong in China as observed by Chui et   al. (2010). Nof-
singer and Sias (1999) further support our findings they show that herding and feed back
trading by institutional investors is more effective in leading to the momentum effect as
compared to that by individual investors. Our findings are also consistent with Akbas et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table4                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                                                                                                              Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions for dual listed A and
B-shares                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dual Listed Chinese A-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 Day                                                                      0.55                                                                                                  2.85                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.49                                                                                                  3.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                  4.24                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  3.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3 Days                                                          0.85                                                                                                  4.64                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 Days                                                          0.80                                                                                                  4.32                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                  2.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 Days                                                          0.70                                                                                                  4.04                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  3.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                  4.08                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  2.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7 Days                                                          0.71                                                                                                  4.06                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  2.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8 Days                                                          0.66                                                                                                  3.87                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  2.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9 Days                                                          0.65                                                                                                  3.78                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  2.97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10 Days                                          0.68                                                                                                  3.94                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                  3.54                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  2.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12 Days                                          0.62                                                                                                  3.62                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  2.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13 Days                                          0.58                                                                                                  3.41                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  2.98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 Days                                          0.59                                                                                                  3.44                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  2.77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15 Days                                          0.65                                                                                                  3.69                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  2.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16 Days                                          0.52                                                                                                  3.26                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  2.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.31                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  3.18                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  2.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19 Days                                          0.52                                                                                                  3.22                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  2.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                  3.44                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dual Listed Chinese B-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 Day                                                                      1.30                                                                                                  6.32                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                  4.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 Days                                                          1.25                                                                                                  6.25                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  4.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3 Days                                                          1.22                                                                                                  6.18                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.58                                                                                                  4.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 Days                                                          1.20                                                                                                  6.01                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5 Days                                                          1.18                                                                                                  5.92                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  3.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6 Days                                                          1.12                                                                                                  5.74                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  3.47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7 Days                                                          1.05                                                                                                  5.66                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                  3.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8 Days                                                          1.01                                                                                                  5.52                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  3.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9 Days                                                          0.95                                                                                                  5.43                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  3.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10 Days                                          0.91                                                                                                  5.36                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11 Days                                          0.89                                                                                                  5.26                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12 Days                                          0.85                                                                                                  5.17                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  2.91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13 Days                                          0.84                                                                                                  5.09                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                  2.73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 Days                                          0.80                                                                                                  4.95                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  2.88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 Days                                          0.77                                                                                                  4.89                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16 Days                                          0.75                                                                                                  4.81                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  2.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17 Days                                          0.71                                                                                                  4.72                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18 Days                                          0.68                                                                                                  4.65                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19 Days                                          0.66                                                                                                  4.58                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  2.43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20 Days                                          0.62                                                                                                  4.51                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.36

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sion                                     R        i,       t          =                 /u1D6FCi,       t          +                /u1D6FDi,       tR        i,       t−k                           +/u1D716i,       t, where t is the collection of all half-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ranging from June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i,t is the return on the
Table4(continued)                        stock of firm i in interval t and  R i,t−k is the return on the stock of firm
                                         i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trading on
                                         all exhanges in China and the sample is obtained by matching stocks
                                         common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The final
                                         sample contains 3238 firms. Out of these we have 88 shares that are
                                         dual listed as A and B-shares both.The trading day is divided in to
                                         non-overlapping half-hour intervals, since the Chinese stock exchange
                                         operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we
                                         have 8 half-hour trading intervals each day. The cross-sectional regres-
                                         sions are estimated for all half-hour intervals in the time sample for
                                         lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and so on until 320 lags. These lags correspond
                                         to daily lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days. The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,t are
                                         reported in percentages as in HKS (2010). Also, the corresponding
                                         Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported along side. The
                                         table reports results for dual listed A and B-shares. There are a total of
                                         84 of these in our sample


(2015) who show that mutual funds have a tendency to invest in past holdings that were
winners and liquidating past losers, thereby exacerbating the momentum effect itself.


4.3                                                                         The existence of intraday momentum in A‑shares versus H‑shares

We now turn our attention to dual-listed A- and H-shares. In addition to the difference in
investor composition as discussed in section 3.3, the A- and H-shares differ in the fact that
Hong Kong is a developed market and has negligible trading constraints as compared to
China where there are price limits, short selling constraints, and day trading constraints
(see Gu et  al. 2018; Chui et  al. 2022). We have 87 firms in our sample that our dual-listed
with both A-share listings and H-share listings.
   We conduct the same regression analysis based on HKS (2010) as described in earlier
sections. The results for the dual-listed A-shares and their cross-listed H-share counterparts
are reported in Table  5. The comparison sheds light on a very substantial difference in the
existence of the intraday momentum pattern documented by HKS (2010) and modelled by
Bogousslavsky (2016) for U.S. markets among the A-shares and their cross-listed H-share
counterparts.
   The pattern appears to be quite subdued for the A-shares with the estimates for the
co-efficient and t-statistics corresponding to a daily lag of 1 day being most weak rela-
tive to those of the H-shares at 0.50 and 2.69 respectively. Then on, the pattern seems to
manifest itself more strongly and is statistically significant for up to twenty days. This is
in sharp contrast to the manifestation of the pattern both in terms of the estimates for the
co-efficient and the corresponding t-statistics for the cross-listed H-shares in the Hong
Kong market which are the highest for a daily lag of 1 day with a regression estimate of
4.02 and a t-statistic of 10.45 respectively. For the H-shares, the effect seems to decay
from the first day as we move towards a lag of 40 days. However, the pattern is still
significant for forty days with the last t-statistic being higher than 3 for all but one day.
   This evidence is the first intraday evidence from outside the United States that docu-
ments the existence of the pattern discovered in HKS (2010). It also sheds light on the
fact that while investor composition explains the momentum effect in part, as demon-
strated by a stronger presence of the pattern in dual-listed B-shares as compared to their
A-share counterparts, the difference is even more substantial if the trading constraints
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table5                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                                                                                                               Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions for dual listed A and
H-shares                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The Chinese A-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 Day                                                                      0.50                                                                                                                 2.69                                                                                             21 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  2.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 Days                                                          0.68                                                                                                                 4.13                                                                                             22 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  2.79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3 Days                                                          0.80                                                                                                                 4.52                                                                                             23 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  2.70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4 Days                                                          0.75                                                                                                                 4.44                                                                                             24 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  2.62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 Days                                                          0.70                                                                                                                 4.09                                                                                             25 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  2.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                                 4.22                                                                                             26 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                  2.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7 Days                                                          0.71                                                                                                                 4.12                                                                                             27 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  2.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8 Days                                                          0.68                                                                                                                 3.92                                                                                             28 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  2.49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 Days                                                          0.66                                                                                                                 3.75                                                                                             29 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  2.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 Days                                          0.68                                                                                                                 3.88                                                                                             30 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  2.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11 Days                                          0.63                                                                                                                 3.51                                                                                             31 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                                 3.35                                                                                             32 Days                                          0.37                                                                                                  2.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 Days                                          0.59                                                                                                                 3.23                                                                                             33 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 Days                                          0.57                                                                                                                 3.14                                                                                             34 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                                 3.31                                                                                             35 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  2.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                                 3.02                                                                                             36 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                                 2.95                                                                                             37 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  2.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                          0.57                                                                                                                 3.08                                                                                             38 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                                 3.00                                                                                             39 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  2.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                          0.52                                                                                                                 2.85                                                                                             40 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  2.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The Chinese H-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 Day                                                                      4.02                                                                                                  10.45                                                                                            21 Days                                          2.39                                                                                                  6.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 Days                                                          3.73                                                                                                                 8.51                                                                                             22 Days                                          2.12                                                                                                  5.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3 Days                                                          3.49                                                                                                                 8.78                                                                                             23 Days                                          2.15                                                                                                  5.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 Days                                                          2.46                                                                                                                 6.26                                                                                             24 Days                                          2.33                                                                                                  5.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 Days                                                          2.73                                                                                                                 7.05                                                                                             25 Days                                          2.18                                                                                                  5.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6 Days                                                          2.76                                                                                                                 6.89                                                                                             26 Days                                          1.47                                                                                                  3.59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7 Days                                                          2.65                                                                                                                 6.71                                                                                             27 Days                                          1.56                                                                                                  3.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8 Days                                                          2.51                                                                                                                 6.07                                                                                             28 Days                                          1.29                                                                                                  3.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9 Days                                                          3.21                                                                                                                 8.51                                                                                             29 Days                                          2.07                                                                                                  5.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10 Days                                          2.74                                                                                                                 6.77                                                                                             30 Days                                          1.63                                                                                                  3.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11 Days                                          2.85                                                                                                                 7.03                                                                                             31 Days                                          1.35                                                                                                  3.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12 Days                                          1.92                                                                                                                 5.10                                                                                             32 Days                                          1.75                                                                                                  3.97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13 Days                                          2.60                                                                                                                 6.83                                                                                             33 Days                                          1.47                                                                                                  3.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 Days                                          2.44                                                                                                                 6.26                                                                                             34 Days                                          1.54                                                                                                  3.58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15 Days                                          2.43                                                                                                                 6.14                                                                                             35 Days                                          1.43                                                                                                  3.51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16 Days                                          2.12                                                                                                                 5.26                                                                                             36 Days                                          1.23                                                                                                  2.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17 Days                                          1.54                                                                                                                 4.06                                                                                             37 Days                                          1.75                                                                                                  3.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18 Days                                          2.09                                                                                                                 5.20                                                                                             38 Days                                          1.59                                                                                                  3.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19 Days                                          2.03                                                                                                                 4.90                                                                                             39 Days                                          1.45                                                                                                  3.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20 Days                                          1.53                                                                                                                 3.73                                                                                             40 Days                                          1.51                                                                                                  3.37

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sion                                     R        i,       t          =                 /u1D6FCi,       t          +                /u1D6FDi,       tR        i,       t−k                            +/u1D716i,       t, where t is the collection of all half-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ranging from June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i,t is the return on the
Table5(continued)                          stock of firm i in interval t and    R i,t−k is the return on the stock of firm
                                           i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trading on
                                           all exhanges in China and the sample is obtained by matching stocks
                                           common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The final
                                           sample contains 3238 firms. Out of these we pick the 87 stocks that
                                           are also cross listed in Hong Kong and trade as H-shares.The trad-
                                           ing day is divided in to non-overlapping half-hour intervals, since
                                           the Chinese stock exchange operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then
                                           from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-hour trading intervals each day.
                                           For the H-listed shares in Hong Kong the trading hours are 9:30 am
                                           to 4:00 pm, corresponding to 13 half hour intervals every day. The
                                           cross-sectional regressions are estimated for all half-hour intervals
                                           in the time sample for lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and so on until 320 lags.
                                           These lags correspond to daily lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days. The time series
                                           averages of /u1D6FDi,t are reported in percentages as in HKS (2010). Also,
                                           the corresponding Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported
                                           along side

are removed as in cross-listed H-shares. This provides further motivation to study the
impact of trading constraints on the intraday momentum effect.


4.4                            Controlling          for size

Li and Wang (2010) show that institutional investors in Chinese markets have the ten-
dency to herd in large stocks. There may be various reasons for this phenomenon. Previ-
ous studies have regarded large stocks as being more price efficient and liquid (Chordia
et    al.       2005). Also, owing to the need to be able to liquidate securities urgently in the
event of poor performance, specifically open ended funds have to be sure that they will
be able to liquidate the securities at any cost(Coval and Stafford 2007). This is easier if
an institution invests in to large and generally more liquid stocks in an emerging market.
    We now therefore, conduct our analysis to examine the existence of the intraday pat-
tern in the Chinese Markets by segregating our sample into small, medium, and large
firms by size (market capitalization) terciles. The results are reported in Table                                         6.  We
find that the pattern manifests itself more strongly as we move from small to medium
and from medium to large firms.
    The weakest estimate for the lag of 1 day comes from the small firms, 0.28 with a
t-statistic of 2.82 and then there is a monotonous rise to 0.33 with a t-statistic of 2.96 for
the medium firms and the strongest estimate for a daily lag is shown by large firms with
an estimate of 0.46 and a t-statistic of 3.05. We do notice however that across small,
medium and large firms alike, the momentum pattern is strongest for the lag of 3 days.
This is also true for the all A-share sample discussed in Section   3.1 and presented in
Table 3                                                                            .

4.5                                                                           Controlling for time of day

Gao et   al. (2018) find evidence of the existence of an intraday momentum pattern where
the first half-hour returns on the S &P ETF predict the last half-hour of returns. In addition
to the S &P ETF, Gao et   al. (2018) find similar evidence of the existence of an intraday
momentum pattern in ten other domestic and international ETFs that are actively traded.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table6                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions controlling for size
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Small Cap Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 Day                                                                      0.28                                                                                                  2.82                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  2.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 Days                                                          0.49                                                                                                  4.18                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  3.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 Days                                                          0.58                                                                                                  4.56                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  3.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4 Days                                                          0.52                                                                                                  4.30                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5 Days                                                          0.44                                                                                                  4.04                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  4.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6 Days                                                          0.51                                                                                                  4.26                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7 Days                                                          0.49                                                                                                  4.11                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8 Days                                                          0.50                                                                                                  4.20                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.20                                                                                                  2.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9 Days                                                          0.56                                                                                                  4.39                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  4.35                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.18                                                                                                  2.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  3.17                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  2.88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  4.32                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.90                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      14 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.77                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.25                                                                                                  2.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.66                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.23                                                                                                  2.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.77                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.20                                                                                                  2.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  3.16                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.19                                                                                                  2.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.55                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.18                                                                                                  2.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.80                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.20                                                                                                  2.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  3.47                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.19                                                                                                  2.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Medium Cap Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 Day                                                                      0.33                                                                                                  2.96                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  3.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 Days                                                          0.50                                                                                                  4.14                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  3.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 Days                                                          0.60                                                                                                  4.55                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4 Days                                                          0.55                                                                                                  4.30                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  3.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5 Days                                                          0.51                                                                                                  4.18                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6 Days                                                          0.55                                                                                                  4.28                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7 Days                                                          0.53                                                                                                  4.20                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  3.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8 Days                                                          0.55                                                                                                  4.24                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9 Days                                                          0.57                                                                                                  4.36                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10 Days                                          0.61                                                                                                  4.43                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  2.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.61                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12 Days                                          0.58                                                                                                  4.40                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.26                                                                                                  2.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  3.17                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.25                                                                                                  2.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  3.81                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  2.48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.72                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.24                                                                                                  2.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.81                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.22                                                                                                  2.17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.45                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.21                                                                                                  2.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.58                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.20                                                                                                  2.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.89                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.24                                                                                                  2.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.50                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.19                                                                                                  2.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The Large Cap Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 Day                                                                      0.46                                                                                                  3.05                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  3.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 Days                                                          0.70                                                                                                  4.43                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3 Days                                                          0.77                                                                                                  4.79                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  3.48
Table6(continued)                                                                                                       Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic

                                                                                                                        4 Days                                                          0.76                                                                                                  4.70                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.58                                                                                                  3.57
                                                                                                                        5 Days                                                          0.68                                                                                                  4.37                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.62                                                                                                  3.94
                                                                                                                        6 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                  4.49                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.31
                                                                                                                        7 Days                                                          0.69                                                                                                  4.39                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.61                                                                                                  3.77
                                                                                                                        8 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                  4.51                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  3.22
                                                                                                                        9 Days                                                          0.76                                                                                                  4.65                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.15
                                                                                                                        10 Days                                          0.77                                                                                                  4.69                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  2.82
                                                                                                                        11 Days                                          0.56                                                                                                  3.54                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  2.79
                                                                                                                        12 Days                                          0.71                                                                                                  4.43                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  2.72
                                                                                                                        13 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  3.26                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  2.65
                                                                                                                        14 Days                                          0.65                                                                                                  4.22                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.60
                                                                                                                        15 Days                                          0.63                                                                                                  4.02                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  2.70
                                                                                                                        16 Days                                          0.46                                                                                                  2.95                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  2.52
                                                                                                                        17 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  3.31                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  2.46
                                                                                                                        18 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.38                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.33
                                                                                                                        19 Days                                          0.47                                                                                                  3.09                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.38
                                                                                                                        20 Days                                          0.59                                                                                                  3.67                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.28

                                                                                                                        This table reports the results for our all A-share sample separated in to
                                                                                                                        small, medium and large stocks by market capitalization to study the
                                                                                                                        impact of size on the existence of the pattern. The results are reported
                                                                                                                        for the simple cross-sectional regression R                                                                                                            i,t      =     /u1D6FCi,t    +/u1D6FDi,tRi,t−k       +               /u1D716i,t,
                                                                                                                        where t is the collection of all half-hour intervals for which the stock
                                                                                                                        trades during the sample period ranging from June 1, 2016 to March
                                                                                                                        1, 2019. R                         i,t is the return on the stock of firm i in interval t and                                                                                                                         Ri,t−k
                                                                                                                        is the return on the stock of firm i lagged by k intervals. The sample
                                                                                                                        consists of all stocks trading on all exchanges in China and the sample
                                                                                                                        is obtained by matching stocks common in both our Bloomberg data
                                                                                                                        and CSMAR data. The final sample contains 3278 firms. These are
                                                                                                                        then split in to 1093 stocks in the small and medium firm categories
                                                                                                                        and 1092 in the large cap category of firms. The trading day is divided
                                                                                                                        in to non-overlapping half-hour intervals, since the Chinese stock
                                                                                                                        exchange operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then from 1:00 to 3:00
                                                                                                                        pm, we have 8 half-hour trading intervals each day. The cross-sec-
                                                                                                                        tional regressions are estimated for all half-hour intervals in the time
                                                                                                                        sample for lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and so on until 320 lags. These lags
                                                                                                                        correspond to daily lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days. The time series averages
                                                                                                                        of /u1D6FDi,t are reported in percentages as in HKS (2010). Also, the corre-
                                                                                                                        sponding Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported along side

Bogousslavsky (2016) cite some anecdotal evidence that some investors are only active at
the beginning and the end of the day. However, they find that their pattern is not limited to
the opening and ending half-hour intervals. To examine this further, we exclude the first
and last half-hour from our sample and conduct the regression analysis once again to see if
it makes any difference. The results from this analysis are reported in Table  7. Our regres-
sion is the same as done in previous sections following HKS (2010).
           We find that none out of the forty regression estimates have a t-statistic that is greater
than 3. The effect is almost non-existing as demonstrated by the weakness of the estimates
and their corresponding t-statistics. This provides some evidence that the existence of the
effect is strongly dependent on the time of the day for the Chinese A-share market. To
further clarify the findings in simple words, we can say that the first half-hour interval and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table7                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                          Lag                                                                Estimate                                                                t-Statistic                                                                Lag                                                                Estimate                                                                t-Statistic
regressions controlling for first
and last half hour                                                                                                                                                                                      The Chinese A-shares
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                  0.13                                                                                                                        1.20                                                                                                                                  21                                                                                  0.25                                                                                                                        1.93
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                                                  0.18                                                                                                                        1.82                                                                                                                                  22                                                                                  0.27                                                                                                                        1.96
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3                                                                                                  0.37                                                                                                                        2.58                                                                                                                                  23                                                                                  0.25                                                                                                                        1.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                                                                  0.39                                                                                                                        2.74                                                                                                                                  24                                                                                  0.24                                                                                                                        1.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5                                                                                                  0.30                                                                                                                        2.25                                                                                                                                  25                                                                                  0.23                                                                                                                        1.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6                                                                                                  0.28                                                                                                                        2.03                                                                                                                                  26                                                                                  0.22                                                                                                                        1.59
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7                                                                                                  0.29                                                                                                                        2.11                                                                                                                                  27                                                                                  0.21                                                                                                                        1.49
                                                                                                                                                                                                        8                                                                                                  0.28                                                                                                                        2.01                                                                                                                                  28                                                                                  0.13                                                                                                                        1.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                        9                                                                                                  0.30                                                                                                                        2.19                                                                                                                                  29                                                                                  0.11                                                                                                                        1.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10                                                                                  0.31                                                                                                                        2.38                                                                                                                                  30                                                                                  0.12                                                                                                                        1.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                        11                                                                                  0.17                                                                                                                        1.33                                                                                                                                  31                                                                                  0.25                                                                                                                        1.81
                                                                                                                                                                                                        12                                                                                  0.33                                                                                                                        2.47                                                                                                                                  32                                                                                  0.21                                                                                                                        1.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                        13                                                                                  0.17                                                                                                                        1.31                                                                                                                                  33                                                                                  0.19                                                                                                                        1.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                        14                                                                                  0.31                                                                                                                        2.31                                                                                                                                  34                                                                                  0.15                                                                                                                        1.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                        15                                                                                  0.24                                                                                                                        1.91                                                                                                                                  35                                                                                  0.10                                                                                                                        0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                        16                                                                                  0.14                                                                                                                        1.22                                                                                                                                  36                                                                                  0.11                                                                                                                        1.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                        17                                                                                  0.23                                                                                                                        1.82                                                                                                                                  37                                                                                  0.11                                                                                                                        0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                        18                                                                                  0.24                                                                                                                        1.85                                                                                                                                  38                                                                                  0.07                                                                                                                        0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                  0.13                                                                                                                        1.15                                                                                                                                  39                                                                                  0.05                                                                                                                        0.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                        20                                                                                  0.24                                                                                                                        1.75                                                                                                                                  40                                                                                  0.03                                                                                                                        0.55

                                                                                                                                                                                                        This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sion                         R        i,       t =            /u1D6FCi,       t  +           /u1D6FDi,       tR        i,       t−k        +/u1D716i,       t, where t is the collection of all half-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ranging from June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i,t is the return on
                                                                                                                                                                                                        the stock of firm i in interval t and                                                                                                                                                                Ri,t−k                      is the return on the stock of
                                                                                                                                                                                                        firm     i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trad-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ing on all exhanges in China and the sample is obtained by matching
                                                                                                                                                                                                        stocks common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                        final sample contains 3238 firms. The first and the last intervals are
                                                                                                                                                                                                        excluded for each trading day and the analyses is carried out.The trad-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ing day is divided in to non-overlapping half-hour intervals, since
                                                                                                                                                                                                        the Chinese stock exchange operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then
                                                                                                                                                                                                        from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-hour trading intervals each day.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        However, dropping the first and last half hour leaves us with 6 half-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        hour intervals only. The cross-sectional regressions are estimated for
                                                                                                                                                                                                        all half-hour intervals in the time sample for lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                        so on until 320 lags. These lags correspond to daily lags of 1,2,3,...
                                                                                                                                                                                                        40 days. The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,           t are reported in percentages as
                                                                                                                                                                                                        in HKS (2010). Also, the corresponding Fama and MacBeth (1973)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        t-statistics are reported along side



last half-hour interval exhibit the bulk of the intraday momentum for the Chinese A-share
markets and the effect is not consistent HKS (2010) who find the pattern as being prevalent
across all half-hour intervals of the trading day and not just the first and last half-hour.
Our findings are more consistent with Khademalomoom and Narayan (2019) who study
the intraday patterns in currency markets and find the existence of a time of the day effect.
4.6                                                                           Controlling for price limits

This section provides perhaps the most compelling evidence that the effect documented by
HKS (2010) is not observed in China and the presence of the intraday momentum pattern
is weakest for the daily lag of 1 day. Whereas, in the US it is strongest for a daily lag of 1
day. In other words, it is found in the US that the returns for instance between 10:00 and
10:30 today for a particular stock will predict its returns for the same interval tomorrow.
However, in China it is observed that this predictability is the lowest between today and the
next day. We explore major reasons for it and the existence of price limits is a good candi-
date to explain this effect as stocks that are affected by price limits experience significant
trading frictions and the likelihood of execution of trades over the subsequent days also
becomes low (Gu et al. 2018).
   We do this by dropping out the top and bottom decile from our sample for every half-
hour interval reported in our sample. This is done to avoid the market frictions that traders
face in the existence of price limits as explained in Gu et al. (2018) where the likelihood of
trade execution falls as the stock hits its price limits. As the top and bottom decile for each
half-hour exhibit the extremes in terms of price movements, it is plausible to remove them
from our analyses and determine whether it is the daily price limits which curtails the intra-
day momentum pattern in Chinese markets.
   To filter out the effect of price limits, we adopt an innovative approach which is to sort
the stocks into deciles every half-hour, and remove the top and bottom decile from the
sample. Thereafter, we conduct similar regression analysis that we have conducted thus far
based on HKS (2010). The results from the analysis are reported in Table 8.
   The results highlight the impact of price limits which are mostly likely to affect top and
bottom decile of stocks sorted on returns at the end of each half-hour interval. We notice
that the regression estimates for the daily lag of 1 day are much better in this sample with
a co-efficient of 0.52 and a t-statistic of 4.92 versus a co-efficient of 0.36 and a t-statistic of
2.94 for the wider all A-share sample which doesn’t drop the top and bottom decile stocks.
This provides evidence that price limits hamper the intraday momentum effect that is the
subject of our analysis in this study.


4.7                                                                           Day trading rule, return reversals and contrarian strategies

HKS (2010) document that short-term return reversals last for 30–60   min in the US mar-
kets. We document similar results for the UK where return reversals last for up to thirty
minutes. However, cross-sectional regression results indicate that for China return reversals
last for 30–60    min. This indicates that it takes longer for Chinese stocks to converge to
market efficiency. Also, the resolving of return reversals within 30  min by the UK market
as a whole indicates that markets have become more efficient since 2005 when HKS (2010)
period of study ends.
   In Table      9 we report the cross-sectional regression results for the regression of each
trading interval from 9:30 to 11:30 am and from 1:00 to 3:00 pm (which makes a total
of 8 daily trading intervals) on their lagged returns for lags of 1,2,3,...20 for China and
1,2,3,...51 for the UK since they have 17 half-hour intervals as they trade from 8:00
am to 4:30pm. Like HKS (2010) we employ the cross-sectional regression approach
applied by Jegadeesh (1990) and report the corresponding Fama and MacBeth (1973)
t-statistics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table8                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                   Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions controlling for price
limits                                                                                                                                                           The Chinese A-shares
                                                                                                                                                                 1 Day                                                                      0.52                                                                                                  4.92                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.34                                                                                                  3.22
                                                                                                                                                                 2 Days                                                          0.51                                                                                                  4.86                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  3.02
                                                                                                                                                                 3 Days                                                          0.65                                                                                                  7.21                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.28                                                                                                  2.88
                                                                                                                                                                 4 Days                                                          0.51                                                                                                  4.41                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  3.44
                                                                                                                                                                 5 Days                                                          0.53                                                                                                  3.97                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  3.18
                                                                                                                                                                 6 Days                                                          0.55                                                                                                  4.65                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  3.05
                                                                                                                                                                 7 Days                                                          0.45                                                                                                  4.08                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.95
                                                                                                                                                                 8 Days                                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.99                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.70
                                                                                                                                                                 9 Days                                                          0.52                                                                                                  4.52                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.26                                                                                                  2.62
                                                                                                                                                                 10 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  4.32                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.24                                                                                                  2.57
                                                                                                                                                                 11 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  3.85                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.25                                                                                                  2.60
                                                                                                                                                                 12 Days                                          0.49                                                                                                  4.23                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.23                                                                                                  2.44
                                                                                                                                                                 13 Days                                          0.39                                                                                                  3.62                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.22                                                                                                  2.37
                                                                                                                                                                 14 Days                                          0.49                                                                                                  4.18                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.19                                                                                                  2.26
                                                                                                                                                                 15 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  4.03                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.18                                                                                                  2.19
                                                                                                                                                                 16 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  3.13                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.17                                                                                                  2.14
                                                                                                                                                                 17 Days                                          0.38                                                                                                  3.49                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.15                                                                                                  2.09
                                                                                                                                                                 18 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  5.00                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.14                                                                                                  2.05
                                                                                                                                                                 19 Days                                          0.36                                                                                                  3.26                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.15                                                                                                  2.07
                                                                                                                                                                 20 Days                                          0.39                                                                                                  3.57                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.13                                                                                                  2.01

                                                                                                                                                                 This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                                                 sion                   R        i,       t=       /u1D6FCi,       t+       /u1D6FDi,       tR        i,       t−k+/u1D716i,       t, where t is the collection of all half-
                                                                                                                                                                 hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period
                                                                                                                                                                 ranging from June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. R                                                                                                                                                                       i,t is the return on the
                                                                                                                                                                 stock of firm i in interval t and                                                                                                          R      i,t−k           is the return on the stock of firm
                                                                                                                                                                 i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trading on
                                                                                                                                                                 all exhanges in China and the sample is obtained by matching stocks
                                                                                                                                                                 common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The final
                                                                                                                                                                 sample contains 3238 firms.The trading day is divided in to non-over-
                                                                                                                                                                 lapping half-hour intervals, since the Chinese stock exchange operates
                                                                                                                                                                 from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-
                                                                                                                                                                 hour trading intervals each day. Stocks are sorted in to top and bot-
                                                                                                                                                                 tom deciles at the end of every half hour interval based on returns and
                                                                                                                                                                 the top and bottom deciles are dropped. The cross-sectional regres-
                                                                                                                                                                 sions are estimated for all half-hour intervals in the time sample for
                                                                                                                                                                 lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and so on until 320 lags. These lags correspond
                                                                                                                                                                 to daily lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days. The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,t are
                                                                                                                                                                 reported in percentages as in HKS (2010). Also, the corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                 Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported along side. This
                                                                                                                                                                 table separates our all A-share sample in to small, medium and large
                                                                                                                                                                 stocks by market capitalization to study the impact of size on the exist-
                                                                                                                                                                 ence of the pattern


               The most striking feature is the return reversibility in China at intervals just beyond the
1 day lag. This suggests that due to the ban on day trading, a lot of traders rush to unwind
their positions and potentially book profits on trades from the previous day as suggested by
the negative sign of the co-efficient, and this effect is highly significant. Additionally, it can
be interpreted as investors taking a contrarian strategy. This eventually has implications for
Table9                                                                                         Cross sectional regressions demonstrating the impact of the day trading rule

Lag                                                                Estimate                                                                t-Statistic                                                                Lag                                                                Estimate                                                                t-Statistic                                                                Lag                                                                Estimate                                                                t-Statistic

The United Kingdom
1                                                                                                   − 0.23                                                                                          − 1.54                                                                                                   18                                                                                                                 0.08                                                                                                                        1.78                                                                                                   35                                                                                                                 0.02                                                                                                                        1.27
2                                                                                                                                 0.25                                                                                                                        2.46                                                                                                   19                                                                                                                 0.07                                                                                                                        1.70                                                                                                   36                                                                                                                 0.05                                                                                                                        1.58
3                                                                                                                                 0.24                                                                                                                        2.42                                                                                                   20                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        2.02                                                                                                   37                                                                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                        1.19
4                                                                                                                                 0.20                                                                                                                        2.31                                                                                                   21                                                                                                                 0.11                                                                                                                        1.97                                                                                                   38                                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                                        1.41
5                                                                                                                                 0.18                                                                                                                        2.26                                                                                                   22                                                                                                                 0.13                                                                                                                        2.06                                                                                                   39                                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                                        1.38
6                                                                                                                                 0.17                                                                                                                        2.22                                                                                                   23                                                                                                                 0.02                                                                                                                        1.32                                                                                                   40                                                                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                        1.16
7                                                                                                                                 0.15                                                                                                                        2.17                                                                                                   24                                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                        1.93                                                                                                   41                                                                                                                 0.02                                                                                                                        1.25
8                                                                                                                                 0.14                                                                                                                        2.12                                                                                                   25                                                                                                                 0.08                                                                                                                        1.81                                                                                                   42                                                                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                        1.12
9                                                                                                                                 0.15                                                                                                                        2.14                                                                                                   26                                                                                                                 0.18                                                                                                                        2.23                                                                                                   43                                                                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                        1.09
10                                                                                                                 0.13                                                                                                                        2.10                                                                                                   27                                                                                                                 0.19                                                                                                                        2.28                                                                                                   44                                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                                        1.35
11                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        2.05                                                                                                   28                                                                                                                 0.17                                                                                                                        2.20                                                                                                   45                                                                                                                 0.04                                                                                                                        1.47
12                                                                                                                 0.11                                                                                                                        2.00                                                                                                   29                                                                                                                 0.16                                                                                                                        2.19                                                                                                   46                                                                                                                 0.02                                                                                                                        1.23
13                                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                        1.95                                                                                                   30                                                                                                                 0.14                                                                                                                        2.13                                                                                                   47                                                                                                                 0.01                                                                                                                        1.02
14                                                                                                                 0.09                                                                                                                        1.89                                                                                                   31                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        2.02                                                                                                   48                                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                                        1.33
15                                                                                                                 0.08                                                                                                                        1.84                                                                                                   32                                                                                                                 0.13                                                                                                                        2.08                                                                                                   49                                                                                                                 0.02                                                                                                                        1.21
16                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        2.03                                                                                                   33                                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                        1.91                                                                                                   50                                                                                                                 0.06                                                                                                                        1.62
17                                                                                                                 1.80                                                                                                        10.18                                                                                                   34                                                                                                                 1.55                                                                                                                        8.73                                                                                                   51                                                                                                                 1.23                                                                                                                        8.07
China
1                                                                                                   − 0.29                                                                                          − 2.09                                                                                                                  9                                                                                    − 0.58                                                                                          − 7.14                                                                                                   17                                                                                   − 0.45                                                                                          − 4.36
2                                                                                                   − 0.20                                                                                          − 1.58                                                                                                   10                                                                                   − 0.18                                                                                          − 1.50                                                                                                   18                                                                                   − 0.15                                                                                          − 1.23
3                                                                                                                                 0.16                                                                                                                        1.42                                                                                                   11                                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                        0.62                                                                                                   19                                                                                                                 0.09                                                                                                                        0.55
4                                                                                                                                 0.14                                                                                                                        0.98                                                                                                   12                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        0.72                                                                                                   20                                                                                                                 0.08                                                                                                                        0.56
5                                                                                                                                 0.20                                                                                                                        1.99                                                                                                   13                                                                                                                 0.14                                                                                                                        0.93                                                                                                   21                                                                                                                 0.12                                                                                                                        0.60
6                                                                                                                                 0.24                                                                                                                        2.42                                                                                                   14                                                                                                                 0.22                                                                                                                        2.26                                                                                                   22                                                                                                                 0.18                                                                                                                        1.76
7                                                                                                                                 0.43                                                                                                                        3.31                                                                                                   15                                                                                                                 0.26                                                                                                                        2.65                                                                                                   23                                                                                                                 0.25                                                                                                                        2.49
8                                                                                                                                 0.36                                                                                                                        2.94                                                                                                   16                                                                                                                 0.56                                                                                                                        4.03                                                                                                   24                                                                                                                 0.65                                                                                                                        4.63

This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regression R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i,t      =                      /u1D6FCi,t    +                        /u1D6FDi,tR                  i,t−k       +/u1D716i,t, where t is
the collection of all half-hour intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period ranging from
June 1, 2016 to March 1, 2019. Ri,t is the return on the stock of firm i in interval t and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri,       t−k is the return on
the stock of firm i lagged by k intervals. The sample consists of all stocks trading on all exhanges in China
and the sample is obtained by matching stocks common in both our Bloomberg data and CSMAR data. The
final sample contains 3238 firms.The trading day is divided in to non-overlapping half-hour intervals, since
the Chinese stock exchange operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and then from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-
hour trading intervals each day. The cross-sectional regressions are estimated for all half-hour intervals in
the time sample for lags k=1, 2, 3, 4 and so on until 20 lags. For the UK there are 17 half hour intervals in
the trading day, so 51 intervals make up for 3 days. The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,           t are reported in percent-
ages as in HKS (2010). Also, the corresponding Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported along
side. First UK is reported, next China is reported


market efficiency as the ban on day trading leads to aggressive behaviour to reverse posi-
tions as soon as the 24-hour period passes. The evidence is supportive of the findings of
Kaniel et   al. (2008) and Baltzer et   al. (2019) who find that domestic individual investors
are most likely to be contrarians and engage in contrarian strategies rather than momentum
strategies. Our findings are consistent with Li et   al. (2019) who find that the day trading
rule or ‘T+1’ settlement rule which restricts intraday buying and then selling in Chinese
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

markets is also responsible for the weaker presence of herding phenomenon on the sell side
as compared to the buy side.


4.8                                                                           Intraday momentum por tfolio returns

Following the methodology of HKS (2010) who follow the portfolio formation of
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) we also conduct a similar analysis. Table                                                                                                                                                                                            10 reports the per                                    -
formance of the portfolios formed on the basis of each half-hour interval’s returns. The
stocks are sorted every half-hour and portfolios are formed using the top and bottom
deciles and their half-hour returns are observed for the next forty days (during the same
half-hour interval). We ensure that all deciles have the same number of stocks as required
by HKS (2010) as it is critical to form equal-weighted portfolios. All intervals from 8:00
to 16:30 are taken and stocks are sorted every half-hour for the UK markets. The sam-
ple includes all UK firms from 1                             st January, 2017 to 31                   st December, 2017. For the Chinese
A-share markets all intervals from 9:30 to 11:30 and then 1:00 to 3:00 pm are taken. The
average return spreads (top minus bottom decile) on portfolios formed on the basis on the
performance during the relevant historical half-hour (with lags 1 to 40 days) interval are
reported. The stocks are grouped into ten portfolios with an equal number of stocks in each
portfolio. The returns are reported in basis points to make more economic sense.
     We find that the pattern is quite strong in the UK markets and for a daily lag of 1 day,
the portfolio returns are nearly 4 basis points, which is higher than what has been reported
for the US and the t-statistics are highly significant with a value of 13.85. This evidence
is the first intraday evidence of the pattern documented by HKS (2010) outside the US in
terms of an equally weighted portfolio return. This is a striking finding since usually it is
seen that post-publication return predictability of variables declines (McLean and Pontiff
2016). We observe that for the UK, the effect yields significant and positive returns spe-
cially during the first ten days.
     For Chinese A-shares, the picture is rather different. We observe that the spreads are
much narrower and the effect is not significant. Particularly for the strategy based on 1
daily lag and the lags beyond 10 days, it is insignificant. The high minus low portfolio
return on a strategy based on a 1-day lag for Chinese A-shares is 0.55 basis points and
has a t-statistic of 1.52. We find that the intraday momentum pattern is strongest for the
strategy based on the high minus low portfolio returns with a lag of 3 days.
     The Brazilian markets and the dual-listed B- and H-shares are much like the UK and
the US. We see a peaking of the intraday momentum pattern in terms of returns when
we use a 1-day lag strategy to form a portfolio based on high minus low stocks. The
profits are of the range of 2.36 basis points for B-shares, 3.54 basis points for H-shares,
and 3.09 basis points for Brazil for a portfolio formed based on a 1-day lag. These mar                                        -
kets are dominated by institutional investors and the intraday predictability in the cross-
section of stock returns seems synonymous with them. Whereas, in the retail investors
dominated market of Chinese A-shares, the pattern is weakest for a 1-day lag. The day
trading rule, the price limit rule, and retail investor procrastination serve to explain the
different set of findings for the Chinese A-shares.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table11                                                                                                         Institutional holdings before and after inclusion in MSCI Emerging Markets Index

Type                                                                                                            Number of Stocks                                                           Institutional Hold-Float held Number of Domestic Own-
                                                                           ings (Percentage)                              (Percentage)                      Institutions                      ership (Percent-
                                                                                                                                                                                              age)

A-shares                                                           233                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   49                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18                                                                                                                                                                                100                                                                                                                                                             85
                                                                           (55)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (29)                                                                                                                                                           (150)                                                                                                                                       (83)

This table reports the percentage of institutional holdings, percentage of float held by institutional investors,
number of financial institutions holding/trading the shares and the percentage held by domestic investors.
These measures are reported for the shares before the inclusion of 233 large cap A-shares in the MSCI
Emerging Markets Index as of May 31, 2018 (before inclusion) and as of 1st March, 2019 (after inclusion).
Numbers reported in parenthesis represent after the inclusion


4.9                                                                           Inclusion of A‑shares in the MSCI emerging markets index

We now consider 233 A-shares that were included in the Morgan Stanley Capital Inter                            -
national (MSCI) Emerging Markets Index from June 1, 2018. It is believed that the
inclusion of these Chinese A shares in the MSCI index has significantly increased the
attractiveness of these shares as well as the Chinese stock market as a whole to interna-
tional investors and thus their liquidity. Indeed Table                          11 shows that since the inclusion,
these shares have had a substantial increase in institutional owners.
       We study these stocks from June 1, 2016 to May 31, 2018 (before inclusion in
the index) and from June 1, 2018 to March 1, 2019 (after inclusion in the index). In
Table         12, we report the regression comparison before and after the inclusion in the
MSCI index. We notice that the cross-sectional regression estimates experience a sig-
nificant increase after the inclusion in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. Also, the
statistical significance experiences an increase across the board ranging from 1 to 40
days post-inclusion. Of particular interest is the fact that post inclusion, the 1-day lag
co-efficient estimate is the biggest economically and most significant statistically. This
further signals behaviour similar to the US and UK. Therefore, it leads us to conclude
that inclusion has lead to a shift in behaviour of these stocks that now behave more in
line with stocks that have a greater institutional base of investors.
       Furthermore, as a robustness check to our regression estimates, as in Table  10, we con-
struct a high minus low portfolio in which we go long on the top decile stocks and short
the bottom decile stocks based on each half-hour’s return performance during the day and
hold it until the same interval the following trading day (for up to 40 days). The results are
reported in Table    13. The average return spreads (top minus bottom decile) on portfolios
formed on the basis of the performance during the relevant historical half-hour (with lags 1
to 40 days) intervals are reported. The high minus low portfolio returns experience a signif-
icant increase in the amount of returns generated. For instance, for a strategy that considers
a lag of 1 day the returns before inclusion in the index were 1.44 basis points, whereas,
after the inclusion these returns rise to 2.85 basis points.
Table12                                                                                                         Cross sectional                                                                                                                                               Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic                                          Lag                                                                                                 Estimate                                          t-Statistic
regressions to study the impact of
index inclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               233 A-shares-Before Inclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 Day                                                                      0.76                                                                                                  4.89                                                                                                            21 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 Days                                                          0.83                                                                                                  5.74                                                                                                            22 Days                                          0.43                                                                                                  3.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3 Days                                                          0.86                                                                                                  5.93                                                                                                            23 Days                                          0.45                                                                                                  3.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4 Days                                                          0.72                                                                                                  4.52                                                                                                            24 Days                                          0.49                                                                                                  3.34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5 Days                                                          0.70                                                                                                  4.23                                                                                                            25 Days                                          0.40                                                                                                  2.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6 Days                                                          0.71                                                                                                  4.32                                                                                                            26 Days                                          0.44                                                                                                  3.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7 Days                                                          0.65                                                                                                  4.12                                                                                                            27 Days                                          0.41                                                                                                  2.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8 Days                                                          0.67                                                                                                  4.19                                                                                                            28 Days                                          0.48                                                                                                  3.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 Days                                                          0.63                                                                                                  4.08                                                                                                            29 Days                                          0.42                                                                                                  3.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                  3.86                                                                                                            30 Days                                          0.35                                                                                                  2.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11 Days                                          0.63                                                                                                  4.01                                                                                                            31 Days                                          0.32                                                                                                  2.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 Days                                          0.62                                                                                                  3.92                                                                                                            32 Days                                          0.33                                                                                                  2.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 Days                                          0.60                                                                                                  3.79                                                                                                            33 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  3.52                                                                                                            34 Days                                          0.29                                                                                                  2.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 Days                                          0.55                                                                                                  3.56                                                                                                            35 Days                                          0.31                                                                                                  2.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 Days                                          0.50                                                                                                  3.35                                                                                                            36 Days                                          0.30                                                                                                  2.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                          0.57                                                                                                  3.65                                                                                                            37 Days                                          0.27                                                                                                  2.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                          0.54                                                                                                  3.49                                                                                                            38 Days                                          0.28                                                                                                  2.34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                          0.52                                                                                                  3.43                                                                                                            39 Days                                          0.26                                                                                                  2.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                          0.51                                                                                                  3.40                                                                                                            40 Days                                          0.24                                                                                                  2.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             233 A-shares-After Inclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 Day                                                                      1.68                                                                                                  9.25                                                                                                            21 Days                                          1.22                                                                                                  3.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 Days                                                          1.51                                                                                                  6.87                                                                                                            22 Days                                          1.25                                                                                                  3.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3 Days                                                          1.45                                                                                                  6.26                                                                                                            23 Days                                          1.23                                                                                                  3.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4 Days                                                          1.40                                                                                                  5.22                                                                                                            24 Days                                          1.25                                                                                                  3.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 Days                                                          1.38                                                                                                  4.98                                                                                                            25 Days                                          1.26                                                                                                  3.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6 Days                                                          1.35                                                                                                  4.72                                                                                                            26 Days                                          1.22                                                                                                  3.43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7 Days                                                          1.32                                                                                                  4.36                                                                                                            27 Days                                          1.28                                                                                                  4.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8 Days                                                          1.33                                                                                                  4.44                                                                                                            28 Days                                          1.20                                                                                                  3.34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 Days                                                          1.35                                                                                                  4.70                                                                                                            29 Days                                          1.21                                                                                                  3.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 Days                                          1.31                                                                                                  4.29                                                                                                            30 Days                                          1.19                                                                                                  3.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11 Days                                          1.32                                                                                                  4.34                                                                                                            31 Days                                          1.22                                                                                                  3.39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 Days                                          1.29                                                                                                  4.06                                                                                                            32 Days                                          1.20                                                                                                  3.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 Days                                          1.30                                                                                                  4.12                                                                                                            33 Days                                          1.18                                                                                                  3.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 Days                                          1.31                                                                                                  4.27                                                                                                            34 Days                                          1.16                                                                                                  3.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 Days                                          1.28                                                                                                  3.94                                                                                                            35 Days                                          1.17                                                                                                  3.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 Days                                          1.30                                                                                                  4.08                                                                                                            36 Days                                          1.20                                                                                                  3.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                          1.25                                                                                                  3.72                                                                                                            37 Days                                          1.24                                                                                                  3.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                          1.26                                                                                                  3.81                                                                                                            38 Days                                          1.20                                                                                                  3.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                          1.23                                                                                                  3.59                                                                                                            39 Days                                          1.23                                                                                                  3.79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                          1.25                                                                                                  3.68                                                                                                            40 Days                                          1.17                                                                                                  3.05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              This table reports the results for the simple cross-sectional regression
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R        i,       t         =                /u1D6FCi,       t        +                /u1D6FDi,       tR        i,       t−k                       +/u1D716i,       t, where t is the collection of all half-hour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              intervals for which the stock trades during the sample period split in to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              two parts-before and after the inclusion in the MSCI Emerging Mar-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table12(continued)                                      kets Index (ranging from June 1, 2016 to May 31, 2018 and from June
                                                        1, 2018 to March 1, 2019 respectively). This sub-sample contains the
                                                        233 A-shares that were included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index
                                                        from June 1, 2018. R             i,t is the return on the stock of firm i in interval
                                                        t and    R i,t−k is the return on the stock of firm i lagged by k intervals.
                                                        The trading day is divided in to non-overlapping half-hour intervals,
                                                        since the Chinese stock exchange operates from 9:30 to 11:30 am and
                                                        then from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, we have 8 half-hour trading intervals each
                                                        day. Stocks are sorted in to top and bottom deciles at the end of every
                                                        half hour interval based on returns and the top and bottom deciles are
                                                        dropped. The cross-sectional regressions are estimated for all half-
                                                        hour intervals in the time sample for lags k=8, 16, 34, 96 and so on
                                                        until 320 lags. These lags correspond to daily lags of 1,2,3,... 40 days.
                                                        The time series averages of /u1D6FDi,           t are reported in percentages as in Hes-
                                                        ton et   al. (2010). Also, the corresponding Fama and MacBeth (1973)
                                                        t-statistics are reported along side. This table separates our all A-share
                                                        sample in to small, medium and large stocks by market capitalization
                                                        to study the impact of size on the existence of the pattern


5                             Conclusion

This study is the first to provide empirical evidence on the existence of the intraday pat-
tern documented in the literature by HKS (2010) and further modelled by Bogousslavsky
(2016) in markets outside the United States. The pattern is observed in the UK, Brazil,
B-shares, and Hong Kong listed Chinese H-shares and exhibits all similarities to the pat-
tern observed by HKS (2010). It further proves that HKS (2010) intraday momentum pat-
tern is not a product of data snooping etcetera as discussed by Heston and Sadka (2010)
when they find international evidence for the existence of return seasonality using longer
horizon data on International Markets. However, the evidence on the existence of the pat-
tern in Chinese A-shares indicates that it manifests itself with a much weaker magnitude.
     We are able to explain the weakness of the pattern in Chinese A-shares and the prolif-
eration of the pattern in Chinese B-shares by virtue of difference in investor composition.
The Chinese A-shares market is dominated by domestic individual investors (Nartea et  al.
2017) while the Chinese B-shares market is dominated by foreign institutional investors
(Chui et al. 2022). Since the dual listed B-shares exhibit the pattern more strongly in terms
of cross-sectional regression coefficients we infer that the investor composition plays an
important role in the propagation of the pattern. This is in line with the studies like Kaniel
et   al. (2008) and Baltzer et   al. (2019) that claim that individual investors are contrarians
and institutional investors engage in momentum strategies.
     Furthermore, with regards to China, the pattern manifests itself as best as it can given
the level of trading restrictions. These trading restrictions have raised a lot of debate in
recent years as some studies like Gu et  al. (2018) have argued that these restrictions actu-
ally hurt markets and hamper market efficiency. We provide specific evidence with regards
to price limits and day trading restrictions. We show that if we remove the top and bottom
deciles from our sample, the remaining stocks are less prone to hitting price limits and the
sample behaves more like the US, and the UK, Brazil, and dual-listed B- and H-shares and
the HKS (2010) pattern that we are studying here is more profound. This provides some
evidence that limits of arbitrage act as a deterrent for smooth propagation of the momen-
tum pattern.
     We provide evidence into the impact of the partial inclusion of A-shares into the
highly coveted MSCI Emerging Markets Index and show that it increases the level of
Table13                                                                                                         High minus low                                                                                                                                                Lag                                                                                                      Returns                                               t-Statistic                                               Lag                                                                                                      Returns                                               t-Statistic
portfolio returns before and after
index inclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               233 A-shares-Before Inclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 Day                                                                           1.44                                                                                          4.38                                                                                                                 21 Days                                               0.93                                                                                          3.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 Days                                                               1.52                                                                                          4.46                                                                                                                 22 Days                                               0.91                                                                                          3.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3 Days                                                               1.58                                                                                          4.61                                                                                                                 23 Days                                               0.88                                                                                          3.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4 Days                                                               1.30                                                                                          4.24                                                                                                                 24 Days                                               0.90                                                                                          3.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5 Days                                                               1.21                                                                                          4.06                                                                                                                 25 Days                                               0.85                                                                                          2.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6 Days                                                               1.16                                                                                          3.98                                                                                                                 26 Days                                               0.81                                                                                          2.81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7 Days                                                               1.11                                                                                          3.88                                                                                                                 27 Days                                               0.82                                                                                          2.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8 Days                                                               1.09                                                                                          3.74                                                                                                                 28 Days                                               0.79                                                                                          2.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9 Days                                                               1.10                                                                                          3.77                                                                                                                 29 Days                                               0.80                                                                                          2.77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10 Days                                               1.05                                                                                          3.61                                                                                                                 30 Days                                               0.79                                                                                          2.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11 Days                                               1.02                                                                                          3.55                                                                                                                 31 Days                                               0.75                                                                                          2.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12 Days                                               1.04                                                                                          3.56                                                                                                                 32 Days                                               0.72                                                                                          2.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 Days                                               1.02                                                                                          3.42                                                                                                                 33 Days                                               0.70                                                                                          2.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14 Days                                               1.01                                                                                          3.34                                                                                                                 34 Days                                               0.68                                                                                          2.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15 Days                                               0.98                                                                                          3.26                                                                                                                 35 Days                                               0.65                                                                                          2.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16 Days                                               0.95                                                                                          3.19                                                                                                                 36 Days                                               0.66                                                                                          2.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                               0.96                                                                                          3.21                                                                                                                 37 Days                                               0.62                                                                                          2.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                               0.93                                                                                          3.12                                                                                                                 38 Days                                               0.56                                                                                          2.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                               1.00                                                                                          3.36                                                                                                                 39 Days                                               0.60                                                                                          2.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                               1.04                                                                                          3.51                                                                                                                 40 Days                                               0.55                                                                                          2.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             233 A-shares-After Inclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 Day                                                                           2.85                                                                                          8.85                                                                                                                 21 Days                                               1.26                                                                                          4.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 Days                                                               2.30                                                                                          7.74                                                                                                                 22 Days                                               1.29                                                                                          4.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3 Days                                                               2.15                                                                                          7.51                                                                                                                 23 Days                                               1.20                                                                                          4.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4 Days                                                               2.09                                                                                          7.35                                                                                                                 24 Days                                               1.22                                                                                          4.69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 Days                                                               2.01                                                                                          7.05                                                                                                                 25 Days                                               1.25                                                                                          4.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6 Days                                                               1.95                                                                                          6.85                                                                                                                 26 Days                                               1.17                                                                                          4.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7 Days                                                               2.00                                                                                          6.92                                                                                                                 27 Days                                               1.11                                                                                          4.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8 Days                                                               1.94                                                                                          6.81                                                                                                                 28 Days                                               1.13                                                                                          4.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9 Days                                                               1.90                                                                                          6.69                                                                                                                 29 Days                                               1.08                                                                                          4.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10 Days                                               1.88                                                                                          6.61                                                                                                                 30 Days                                               1.11                                                                                          4.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11 Days                                               1.75                                                                                          6.22                                                                                                                 31 Days                                               1.02                                                                                          4.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12 Days                                               1.65                                                                                          5.95                                                                                                                 32 Days                                               1.04                                                                                          4.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13 Days                                               1.60                                                                                          5.84                                                                                                                 33 Days                                               0.95                                                                                          3.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14 Days                                               1.52                                                                                          5.62                                                                                                                 34 Days                                               0.91                                                                                          3.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15 Days                                               1.45                                                                                          5.47                                                                                                                 35 Days                                               0.87                                                                                          3.58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16 Days                                               1.40                                                                                          5.35                                                                                                                 36 Days                                               0.74                                                                                          3.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17 Days                                               1.36                                                                                          5.23                                                                                                                 37 Days                                               0.70                                                                                          3.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18 Days                                               1.38                                                                                          5.29                                                                                                                 38 Days                                               0.62                                                                                          3.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19 Days                                               1.35                                                                                          5.12                                                                                                                 39 Days                                               0.65                                                                                          3.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 Days                                               1.30                                                                                          4.95                                                                                                                 40 Days                                               0.60                                                                                          3.04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              This table reports the performance for the portfolios formed on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              basis of each half-hour interval’s returns. The stocks are sorted every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              half hour and portfolios are formed using the top and bottom deciles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and their half hour returns are observed for the next forty days(during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Table13(continued)                                     the same half hour interval). All intervals from 8:00 to 16:30 are
                                                       taken and stocks are sorted every half-hour. The sample contains 233
                                                       A-shares which were subject to inclusion in MSCI Emerging Markets
                                                       Index inclusion from the period ranging from June 1, 2016 to May 31,
                                                       2018 (before inclusion in MSCI Emerging Markets Index) and from
                                                       June 1, 2018 to March 1, 2019 (after inclusion in the MSCI Emerging
                                                       Markets Index). The average return spreads(top minus bottom decile)
                                                       on portfolios formed on the basis on the performance during the rel-
                                                       evant historical half hour (with lags 1 to 40 days) interval are reported.
                                                       The stocks are grouped in to ten portfolios with an equal number of
                                                       stocks in each portfolio.The returns are reported in basis points



institutional ownership, the number of participating institutions, the percentage float
held by institutions, and foreign ownership in the included stocks. We use this inclu-
sion as an exogenous shock to the level of institutional ownership in the 233 A-shares
stocks. We show that after the inclusion in the index, the 233 A-shares demonstrate the
existence of the pattern that is closer to the US, the UK, Brazil, and the dual listed B-
and H-shares. This further confirms the role of institutional investors in explaining the
intraday momentum effect.
     We show that at intervals just beyond daily multiples of the trading day, we see
extreme evidence of return reversals. This shows that retail investors desperately wait
to reverse short-term positions and rush to reverse their positions as soon 24-hour
limit passes. It can actually lead to lots of selling pressure and market volatility. This
is once again in line with studies like Kaniel et  al. (2008) and Baltzer et  al. (2019) that
claim that individual investors are contrarians. Since, our A-shares investors are mostly
domestic individual investors (Nartea et    al. 2017) we can say that our results are in
line with the existing evidence. These findings also have implications from a regulatory
perspective.
     We find that the manifestation of the pattern is subject to the size of the firms. We
find that large market capitalization group exhibits the intraday momentum pattern
with the greatest strength owing to the tendency of institutional investors to herd in
large stocks (Li and Wang 2010). However, we find that the time of the day explains
the majority of the existence of the pattern. If we remove the first and last trading inter                                     -
vals, the pattern almost diminishes. Also, a portfolio analyses conducted in the spirit of
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) reveals that the returns on top minus bottom decile portfo-
lios sorted by past half-hour returns and held on for the next forty days have positive but
significant returns, but are mostly weaker than the US, UK, Brazil and dual listed B- and
H-share counterparts. Consistent with our findings, Chui et  al. (2022) find that over the
longer horizon the momentum effect is more prevalent in Chinese B-shares than in their
A-share counterparts. Our evidence further supports the findings of Chui et al. (2022).
     Overall, our study also provides evidence that the tireless efforts of the Chinese
regulators and policy makers to institutionalize the Chinese A-shares market is bear                                     -
ing fruit. Indeed, the plan for inclusion of 168 mid-cap stocks has been fast tracked
and our results show that the dawn of a new era in Chinese stock markets has begun. In
this era, the market will mature and will continue to get institutionalized gradually and
move away from the ‘casino’ like features that it has come to be associated with. Future
research should focus on providing empirical evidence regarding all the positive ben-
efits of institutional investors in the context of China.
Declarations

Conflict of interest                                          The authors have no conflict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.

Open Access                        This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.


References

Akbas F, Armstrong WJ, Sorescu S, Subrahmanyam A (2015) Smart money, dumb money, and capital
      market anomalies. J Financ Econ 118:355–382
Allen F, Qian J, Shan C, Zhu JL (2024) Dissecting the long-term performance of the Chinese stock mar                               -
      ket. J Finance 79:993–1054
Appel IR, Gormley TA, Keim DB (2016) Passive investors, not passive owners. J Financ Econ
      121:111–141
Baltzer M, Jank S, Smajlbegovic E (2019) Who trades on momentum? J Financ Mark 42:56–74
Bena J, Ferreira MA, Matos P, Pires P (2017) Are foreign investors locusts? The long-term effects of
      foreign institutional ownership. J Financ Econ 126:122–146
Bogousslavsky V (2016) Infrequent rebalancing, return autocorrelation, and seasonality. J Finance
      71:2967–3006
Bogousslavsky V (2021) The cross-section of intraday and overnight returns. J Financ Econ 141:172–194
Boone AL, White JT (2015) The effect of institutional ownership on firm transparency and information
      production. J Financ Econ 117:508–533
Borochin P, Yang J (2017) The effects of institutional investor objectives on firm valuation and govern-
      ance. J Financ Econ 126:171–199
Brogaard J, Hendershott T, Riordan R (2014) High-frequency trading and price discovery. Rev Financ
      Stud 27:2267–2306
Cakici N, Fieberg C, Metko D, Zaremba A (2023) Do anomalies really predict market returns? New data
      and new evidence. Rev Finance 28:1–44
Campbell JY, Ramadorai T, Schwartz A (2009) Caught on tape: institutional trading, stock returns, and
      earnings announcements. J Financ Econ 92:66–91
Carpenter JN, Lu F, Whitelaw RF (2021) The real value of China’s stock market. J Financ Econ
      139:679–696
Chen J, Haboub A, Khan A (2024) Limits of arbitrage and their impact on market efficiency: evidence
      from China. Glob Financ J 59:100916
Chordia T, Roll R, Subrahmanyam A (2005) Evidence on the speed of convergence to market efficiency.
      J Financ Econ 76:271–292
Chui ACW, Titman S, Wei KCJ (2010) Individualism and momentum around the world. J Finance
      65:361–392
Chui ACW, Subrahmanyam A, Titman S (2022) Momentum, reversals, and investor clientele. Rev
      Finance 26:217–255
Cortina JJ, Peria MSM, Schmukler SL, Xiao J (2024) The internationalization of China’s equity markets.
      IMF Econ Rev 8:1–57
Coval J, Stafford E (2007) Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. J Financ Econ 86:479–512
Daniel K, Moskowitz TJ (2016) Momentum crashes. J Financ Econ 122:221–247
Fama EF, MacBeth JD (1973) Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. J Polit Econ 81:607–636
Fong KYL, Holden CW, Trzcinka CA (2017) What are the best liquidity proxies for global research?
      Rev Finance 4:1355–1401
Gao L, Han Y, Li SZ, Zhou G (2018) Market intraday momentum. J Financ Econ 129:394–414
Gao Y, Han X, Li Y, Xiong X (2019) Overnight momentum, informational shocks, and late informed
      trading in China. Int Rev Financ Anal 66:101394
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Chen et al.


Gao Y, Han X, Li Y, Xiong X (2021) Investor heterogeneity and momentum-based trading strategies in
        China. Int Rev Financ Anal 74:101654
Griffin JM, Ji X, Martin JS (2003) Momentum investing and business cycle risk: evidence from pole to
        pole. J Finance 58:2515–2547
Grinblatt M, Sheridan T, Russ W (1995) Momentum investment strategies, portfolio performance, and
        herding: a study of mutual fund behavior. Am Econ Rev 8:1088–1105
Gu M, Kang W, Xu B (2018) Limits of arbitrage and idiosyncratic volatility: evidence from China stock
        market. J Bank Finance 86:240–258
Hasbrouck J (2018) High-frequency quoting: short-term volatility in bids and offers. J Financ Quant
        Anal 53:613–614
Heston SL, Sadka R (2008) Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns. J Financ Econ 87:418–445
Heston SL, Korajczyk RA, Sadka R (2010) Intraday patterns in the cross-section of stock returns. J
        Finance 65:1369–1407
Heston SL, Sadka R (2010) Seasonality in the cross section of stock returns: the international evidence. J
        Financ Quant Anal 45:1133–1160
Jegadeesh N (1990) Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. J Finance 45:881–898
Jegadeesh N, Titman S (1993) Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock mar                                      -
        ket efficiency. J Finance 48:65–91
Jegadeesh N, Titman S (2001) Profitability of momentum strategies: an evaluation of alternative expla-
        nations. J Financ 56:699–720
Jiao M, Xinping X, Antai L (2024) Msci index inclusion and price efficiency evidence from china. Int
        Rev Financ Anal 20:103328
Jin M, Kearney F, Li Y, Yang YC (2020) Intraday time-series momentum: evidence from China. J Futur
        Mark 40:632–650
Kaniel R, Saar G, Titman S (2008) Individual investor trading and stock returns. J Finance 63:273–310
Khademalomoom S, Narayan PK (2019) Intraday effects of the currency market. J Int Finan Markets Inst
        Money 58:65–77
Kong D, Lin C, Liu S (2017) Does information acquisition alleviate market anomalies? Categorization
        bias in stock splits. Rev Finance 23:245–277
Li W, Wang SS (2010) Daily institutional trades and stock price volatility in a retail investor dominated
        emerging market. J Financ Mark 13:448–474
Li F, Zhang H, Zheng D (2018) Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns: advanced markets ver                                 -
        sus emerging markets. J Empir Financ 49:263–281
Li J, Zhang Y, Xu F, An Y (2019) Which kind of investor causes comovement? J Int Finan Markets Inst
        Money 61:1–15
Li B, Sun Q, Wei Z (2024a) Implicit barriers, market integration and asset prices: evidence from the
        inclusion of china a-shares in msci global indices. J Int Financ Mark Instd Money 93:101998
Li Z, Liu C, Ni X, Pang J (2024b) Stock market liberalization and corporate investment revisited: evi-
        dence from china. J Bank Finance 158:107053
Limkriangkrai M, Chai D, Zheng G (2023) Market intraday momentum: Apac evidence. Pac Basin
        Financ J 80:102086
Luo CP, Ravina E, Sammon M, Viceira LM (2023) Retail investors’ contrarian behavior around news,
        attention, and the momentum effect. FRB of Chicago Working Paper WP 2023-34
Ma T, Liao C, Jiang F (2024) Factor momentum in the Chinese stock market. J Empir Financ 75:101458
McLean RD, Pontiff J (2016) Does academic research destroy stock return predictability? J Finance
        71:5–32
Nartea GV, Kong D, Wu J (2017) Do extreme returns matter in emerging markets? Evidence from the
        Chinese stock market. J Bank Finance 71:189–197
Nofsinger JR, Sias RW (1999) Herding and feedback trading by institutional and individual investors. J
        Finance 54:2263–2295
Ouyang R, Zhang K, Zhang X, Zhu D (2024) Can factor momentum beat momentum factor? Evidence
        from china. Financ Res Lett 62:105021
O’hara M (2015) High frequency market microstructure. J Financ Econ 116:257–270
Pan L, Tang Y, Jianguo X (2013) Weekly momentum by return interval ranking. Pac Basin Financ J
        21:1191–1208
Pan L, Tang Y, Jianguo X (2015) Speculative trading and stock returns. Rev Finance 20:1835–1865
Qian Y, Ritter JR, Shao X (2024) Initial public offerings Chinese style. J Financ Quant Anal 59:1–38
Renault T (2017) Intraday online investor sentiment and return patterns in the us stock market. J Bank
        Finance 84:25–40
Riordan R, Storkenmaier A (2012) Latency, liquidity and price discovery. J Financ Mark 15:416–437
Rouwenhorst KG (1999) Local return factors and turnover in emerging stock markets. J Finance
      54:1439–1464
Sanjay S, Jain AT, Florent D (2024) The tale of two tails and stock returns for two major emerging mar                                    -
      kets. Rev Quant Finance Account 6:1–27
Shanaev S, Ghimire B (2021) Efficient scholars: academic attention and the disappearance of anomalies.
      Eur J Financ 27:278–304
Tian S, Wu E, Wu Q (2018) Who exacerbates the extreme swings in the Chinese stock market? Int Rev
      Financ Anal 55:50–59
Yao S, Qin Y, Cheng F, Wu JG, Goodell JW (2022) Missing momentum in China: considering indi-
      vidual investor preference. Financ Res Lett 49:103110

Publisher ’s Note                        Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.