Measuring volatility with the realized range ∗
Martin Martens †
Econometric Institute
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Dick van Dijk ‡
Econometric Institute
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Econometric Institute Report EI 2006-10
February 2006
Abstract
Realized variance, being the summation of squared intra-da y returns, has
quickly gained popularity as a measure of daily volatility. Following Parkinson
(1980) we replace each squared intra-day return by the high- low range for
that period to create a novel and more eﬃcient estimator call ed the realized
range. In addition we suggest a bias-correction procedure t o account for the
eﬀects of microstructure frictions based upon scaling the r ealized range with
the average level of the daily range. Simulation experiment s demonstrate
that for plausible levels of non-trading and bid-ask bounce the realized range
has a lower mean squared error than the realized variance, in cluding variants
thereof that are robust to microstructure noise. Empirical analysis of the
S&P500 index-futures and the S&P100 constituents conﬁrm th e potential of
the realized range.
Keywords: Realized volatility; high-low range; high-frequency dat a; market
microstructure noise, bias-correction.
JEL Classiﬁcation : C14, C15, C53.
∗We thank Peter Hansen, participants at the International Co nference on Finance in Copen-
hagen (September 2-4, 2005), the special issue guest editor s Herman van Dijk and Philip Hans
Franses, and two anonymous referees for useful comments and suggestions. Any remaining errors
are ours.
†Econometric Institute, Erasmus University Rotterdam, P.O . Box 1738, NL-3000 DR Rot-
terdam, The Netherlands, Phone: +31 10 408 1285, Fax: +31 10 4 08 9162, E-mail:
mmartens@few.eur.nl
‡Econometric Institute, Erasmus University Rotterdam, P.O . Box 1738, NL-3000 DR Rot-
terdam, The Netherlands, Phone: +31 10 408 1263, Fax: +31 10 4 08 9162, E-mail:
djvandijk@few.eur.nl (corresponding author)
1 Introduction
Measuring and forecasting volatility of ﬁnancial asset ret urns is important for portfo-
lio management, risk management and option pricing. By now i t is well established
that volatility is both time-varying and, to a certain exten t, predictable. An im-
portant issue is how to measure ex-post volatility, which is necessary for proper
evaluation of competing volatility forecasts, among other purposes. Recently much
research has been devoted to the use of high-frequency data f or measuring volatil-
ity. In particular, the sum of squared intra-day returns, ca lled realized variance, is
rapidly gaining popularity for estimating daily volatilit y. In theory, the realized vari-
ance is an unbiased and highly eﬃcient estimator, as illustr ated in Andersen et al.
(2001b), and converges to the true underlying integrated va riance when the length
of the intra-day intervals goes to zero, see Barndorﬀ-Niels en and Shephard (2002).
In practice, market microstructure eﬀects such as bid-ask b ounce pose limitations
to the choice of sampling frequency. Returns at very high fre quencies are distorted
such that the realized variance becomes biased and inconsis tent, see Bandi and Rus-
sell (2005a,b), A ¨ ıt-Sahalia et al. (2005), and Hansen and L unde (2006b). Popular
choices in empirical applications are the ﬁve- and thirty-m inute intervals, which are
believed to strike a balance between the increasing accurac y of higher frequencies
and the adverse eﬀects of market microstructure frictions, see e.g. Andersen and
Bollerslev (1998), Andersen et al. (2001a), Andersen et al. (2003), and Fleming et
al. (2003).
An alternative way of measuring volatility is based on the di ﬀerence between the
maximum and minimum prices observed during a certain period . Parkinson (1980)
shows that the daily (log) high-low range, properly scaled, not only is an unbiased
estimator of daily volatility but is ﬁve times more eﬃcient t han the squared daily
close-to-close return. Correspondingly, Andersen and Bol lerslev (1998) and Brandt
and Diebold (2006) ﬁnd that the eﬃciency of the daily high-lo w range is between
that of the realized variance computed using 3-hour and 6-ho ur returns.
This paper starts from the crucial observation that Parkins on’s result concerning
1
the relative eﬃciency of the high-low range applies to any in terval, in particular
also to the intra-day intervals employed by the realized var iance. That is, in theory,
for each intra-day interval the high-low range is a more eﬃci ent volatility estimator
than the squared return over that interval. We therefore sug gest to measure daily
volatility by the sum of high-low ranges for intra-day inter vals. The resulting es-
timator, which we dub ‘realized range’, should be more eﬃcie nt than the realized
variance based on the same sampling frequency. Indeed, in co ncurrent independent
work, Christensen and Podolskij (2005) derive the theoreti cal properties of the real-
ized range, similar to Barndorﬀ-Nielsen and Shephard (2002 ) for realized variance.
In an ideal world (continuous trading, no market frictions) the realized range is ﬁve
times more eﬃcient than the corresponding realized varianc e, and converges to the
integrated variance at the same rate. At the same time, in suc h an ideal world there
seems to be no need to consider the realized range, as the true daily volatility can
be approximated arbitrarily closely by the realized varian ce using higher and higher
frequencies. However, it is often claimed that the daily ran ge is more robust against
the eﬀects of market microstructure noise than the realized variance, see Alizadeh
et al. (2002) and Brandt and Diebold (2006), among others. Ob viously, the realized
range will be aﬀected more heavily by microstructure noise a s each of the intra-day
ranges is contaminated. Nevertheless, in realistic settin gs it is an open question as
to whether the realized variance or the realized range rende rs a superior measure of
daily volatility. In this paper we attempt to shed light on th is question.
Our approach is based upon Monte Carlo simulation and an empi rical analysis
for S&P500 index-futures and the individual stocks in the S& P100 index. The
simulation experiments reveal that both realized range and realized variance are
upward biased in the presence of bid-ask bounce. We ﬁnd that i n fact the realized
range is aﬀected more than the realized variance at the same s ampling frequency.
Infrequent trading induces a downward bias in the realized r ange, while it does not
aﬀect the realized variance. In case the price path is not obs erved continuously the
observed minimum and maximum price over- and underestimate the true minimum
and maximum, respectively, such that the observed range und erestimates the true
2
range.
We consider a bias-adjustment procedure for the realized ra nge estimator, which
involves scaling the realized range with the ratio of the ave rage level of the daily
range and the average level of the realized range. This is bas ed upon the idea that the
daily range is (almost) not contaminated by microstructure noise and thus provides
a good indication of the true level of volatility. In the simu lation experiments,
we ﬁnd that the scaled realized range is more eﬃcient than the (scaled) realized
variance estimator based on returns sampled at considerabl y higher frequencies.
Comparing the scaled realized range with popular correctio ns of the realized variance
for microstructure noise, we ﬁnd that it outperforms kernel -based estimators, as
considered by Barndorﬀ-Nielsen et al. (2004) and Hansen and Lunde (2005, 2006b),
and is competitive to the two time-scales estimator of Zhang et al. (2005).
The empirical analysis conﬁrms that for both measuring and f orecasting volatility
the (scaled) realized range can compete with and often impro ves upon realized vari-
ance estimators at popular sampling frequencies, includin g the versions that correct
for microstructure noise. This is slightly more so for more a ctively traded stocks.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deﬁnes the realized
range, including the suggested bias-adjustment procedure to counter the adverse
eﬀects of market microstructure noise. Section 3 describes the design and results of
the simulation experiments that illustrate the properties of the realized range in the
presence of market microstructure frictions. Section 4 pre sents the empirical results
for the S&P500 index-futures, both concerning basic proper ties of the realized range
and a comparison between realized range and realized varian ce. Section 5 extends
the comparison to the constituents of the S&P100 index. Fina lly Section 6 concludes.
2 The realized range estimator
Let the security price Pt at time t follow the geometric Brownian motion
dPt = µP tdt + σP tdBt, (1)
3
where µ denotes the drift term, σ is the constant volatility parameter and Bt is a
standard Brownian motion. By Ito’s lemma, the log price proc ess log Pt follows a
Brownian motion with drift µ ∗ = µ − σ 2/ 2 and volatility σ . For ease of notation we
normalize the daily interval to unity. Then for the i-th interval of length ∆ on day
t, for i = 1 , 2, . . . , I with I = 1 / ∆ assumed to be integer, we observe the last price
in that interval Ct,i = Pt−1+i∆ , the high price Ht,i = sup (i−1)∆ <j<i∆ Pt−1+j and the
low price Lt,i = inf (i−1)∆ <j<i∆ Pt−1+j. If the drift µ ∗ is equal to zero, an unbiased
estimator of the variance during interval i, σ 2∆, is the squared return,
r2
t−1+i∆ ,∆ = (log Ct,i − log Ct,i−1)2, (2)
which has variance equal to 2 σ 4∆ 2. Parkinson (1980) proposes the scaled high-low
range estimator for the variance,
(log Ht,i − log Lt,i)2
4 log 2 , (3)
which is also unbiased if µ ∗ = 0, but has variance (9 ξ (3)/ ((4 log 2)2) − 1)σ 4∆ 2 ≈
0. 407σ 4∆ 2, where ξ (3) = ∑ ∞
k=1 1/k 3 is Riemann’s zeta function. Hence the variance
(and the mean squared error) of the squared return (2) is abou t ﬁve times larger
than that of the high-low estimator (3).
If we are interested in estimating the daily variance, we can aggregate either
squared intra-day returns to obtain the so-called realized variance RV ∆
t or high-low
ranges for intra-day intervals to obtain the realized range RR∆
t :
RV ∆
t =
I∑
i=1
r2
t−1+i∆ ,∆ , (4)
RR∆
t = 1
4 log 2
I∑
i=1
(log Ht,i − log Lt,i)2. (5)
If prices follow the continuous geometric Brownian motion w ith drift µ = σ 2/ 2 and
constant volatility σ as speciﬁed in (1), it is straightforward to show that both
RR∆
t and RV ∆
t are unbiased and consistent estimators of the daily varianc e σ 2.
In addition, the relative eﬃciency result stated before for the squared daily return
versus the daily high-low range continues to hold for RV ∆
t and RR∆
t : the variance
of the realized variance is 2 σ 4∆ vis-` a-vis 0 . 407σ 4∆ for the realized range.
4
A few remarks concerning the (realized) range estimators ar e in order. First,
Garman and Klass (1980) suggest to further improve eﬃciency by utilizing the open
and close prices in addition to the high and low prices. Assum ing that the ﬁrst price
in the i-th interval, Ot,i, is identical to the last price in the ( i − 1)-st interval, Ct,i−1,
their minimum variance unbiased estimator for the volatili ty during the i-th interval
of day t is given by
0. 511(log Ht,i − log Lt,i)2 − 0. 383(log Ct,i − log Ct,i−1)2
− 0. 019[(log Ct,i − log Ct,i−1)(log Ht,i + log Lt,i − 2 log Ct,i−1)
− 2(log Ht,i − log Ct,i−1)(log Lt,i − log Ct,i−1)], (6)
which is theoretically 7.4 times more eﬃcient than the squar ed return in (2). They
also propose a “practical” estimator achieving virtually t he same eﬃciency, which
is simply a linear combination of the high-low range and the s quared close-to-close
return:
0. 5(log Ht,i − log Lt,i)2 − (2 log 2 − 1)(log Ct,i − log Ct,i−1)2. (7)
In the context of the daily range, Brown (1990) and Alizadeh e t al. (2002) argue
against the use of open and close prices, based on the fact tha t these are heavily
contaminated by market microstructure eﬀects. This argume nt applies only to the
open and close prices of a trading day, and as such it does not c arry over to the
context of the realized range, where open and close prices of the intra-day intervals
are ‘regular’ prices observed throughout the day. Indeed, w e included realized range
estimators based on (6) and (7) in the simulation experiment s discussed in the next
section, and found that they further improve the eﬃciency re lative to RR∆
t deﬁned in
(5). Detailed results are not reported here for space consid erations, but are available
upon request.
Second, the assumption of zero drift, µ ∗ = µ − σ 2/ 2 = 0 in (1), is crucial for
the unbiasedness and consistency of the high-low range in (3 ). Rogers and Satchell
5
(1991) were the ﬁrst to relax this assumption and suggested t he estimator
(log Ht,i − log Ct,i−1)(log Ht,i − log Ct,i)
+ (log Lt,i − log Ct,i−1)(log Lt,i − log Ct,i), (8)
which is independent of the drift µ and is only slightly less eﬃcient than the Garman-
Klass estimator in (6) in case µ = σ 2/ 2. Subsequently, Kunitomo (1992) and Yang
and Zhang (2000) put forward alternative estimators that al low for non-zero drift,
essentially by considering a transformed price process to e liminate the drift. 1
Finally, and most important for our purposes, Christensen a nd Podolskij (2005)
establish consistency of the realized range estimator RR∆
t as deﬁned in (5) for the
integrated variance under the assumption that the log price follows a continuous
sample path martingale, that is
log Pt = log P0 +
∫ t
0
µ sds +
∫ t
0
σ s−dBs, for 0 ≤ t < ∞ ,
where the instantaneous mean µ = {µ t}t∈[0,∞ ) is a locally bounded predictable pro-
cess, the spot volatility σ = {σ t}t∈[0,∞ ) is a c` adl` ag process,Bs again is a standard
Brownian motion, and σ s− = lim t↑s σ t. Under the additional assumptions that µ
is continuous and σ is everywhere invertible, the asymptotic distribution of RR∆
t
is shown to be mixed normal, with σ governing the mixture. This result is impor-
tant for two reasons. First, it allows for general speciﬁcat ions of the drift µ , which
is possible thanks to the fact that the mean component vanish es suﬃciently fast as
∆ → 0. Second, the range estimator traditionally has been analy zed under the strict
assumption that volatility is constant (at least within a tr ading day). The results
of Christensen and Podolskij (2005) demonstrate that the re alized range estimator
remains consistent in the presence of stochastic volatilit y. The conditions on σ are
in fact rather weak, and allow for models with leverage, long -memory, jumps and
diurnal eﬀects.
1Bali and Weinbaum (2005) provide a thorough comparison of al l the diﬀerent daily range
estimators mentioned here.
6
2.1 Bias-correcting the realized range
The eﬀects of microstructure noise such as bid-ask bounce on realized variance esti-
mators has been studied intensively, see Barndorﬀ-Nielsen et al. (2004), Bandi and
Russell (2005a,b), Zhang et al. (2005), and Hansen and Lunde (2006b), among oth-
ers. As mentioned before, the realized range may also be expe cted to suﬀer from
market microstructure eﬀects. In case prices are observed c ontinuously, the high
price is likely to be an ask while the low price is likely to be a bid such that the
observed range overestimates the true range by exactly the s pread. As this will be
the case for each intra-day interval, this may cause a substa ntial upward bias in the
realized range for high sampling frequencies. One may attem pt to correct for this
bias by subtracting the spread from each intra-day range, as suggested by Brandt
and Diebold (2006) in the context of the daily high-low range estimator. However, in
practice prices are not observed continuously such that the high price may actually
be a bid with a certain probability that depends on the tradin g intensity, complicat-
ing this bias-adjustment. In addition, as mentioned before infrequent trading itself
induces a downward bias in the realized range, as the observe d minimum and maxi-
mum price over- and underestimate the true minimum and maxim um, respectively.
Two procedures have been suggested for correcting the downw ard bias in the
range due to infrequent trading. First, Rogers and Satchell (1991) derive expressions
for the expected diﬀerence between the observed high and low prices and their true
but unobserved counterparts. For the i-th interval during day t, the (log of the)
observed high and low price, Ht,i and Lt,i are equal to
log Ht,i = log H ∗
t,i − δ H and log Lt,i = log L∗
t,i + δ L,
where H ∗
t,i and L∗
t,i are the true maximum and minimum prices, respectively. Unde r
the assumption of equidistant prices, Rogers and Satchell ( 1991) show that E[δ H ] =
E[δ L] = aσ/ √
Ni with a =
√
2π ( 1
4 − (
√
2 − 1)/ 6], and E[δ 2
H ] = E[δ 2
L] = bσ 2/N i
with b = (1 + (3π/ 4))/ 12, where Ni is the number of prices observed during the i-th
interval. Using this result, it is straightforward to deriv e that a bias-corrected version
7
of the high-low range estimator given in (3) is the positive r oot of the equation
ˆσ 2 = (b + a2)
2Ni log 2 ˆσ 2 + a(log Ht,i − log Lt,i)√ Ni log 2 ˆσ + (log Ht,i − log Lt,i)2
4 log 2 . (9)
Second, Christensen and Podolskij (2005) argue that the dow nward bias in the
(realized) range is caused by the fact that the scaling facto r 4 log 2 in (3) is not
appropriate in the presence of infrequent trading. This fac tor derived by Parkinson
(1980) is equal to the second moment of the range of a standard Brownian motion
Bt, that is E[s2
B] = 4 log 2, where
sB = sup
0≤s,t≤1
(Bt − Bs). (10)
Christensen and Podolskij (2005) suggest to replace this fa ctor by the expected value
of the squared range of a Brownian motion that is observed Ni times, the number
of observations during the i-th intra-day interval. In case of equidistant prices, for
example, this boils down to
E
[
max
1≤k,l≤Ni
(Bl/N i − Bk/N i)2
]
.
Unreported results from the simulation experiments in the n ext section show that
both bias-correction procedures work adequately, in that t hey remove the downward
bias in the realized range estimators due to infrequent trad ing to a large extent, even
for the highest frequencies. The Christensen-Podolskij pr ocedure achieves a slightly
lower RMSE than the Rogers-Satchell procedure. A limitatio n of both correction
procedures is, however, that they cannot cope with the upwar d bias induced by bid-
ask bounce. Hence, we suggest an alternative bias-correcti on procedure by scaling
the realized range with the ratio of the average level of the d aily range and the
average level of the realized range over the q previous trading days. That is, the
scaled realized range is deﬁned as
RR∆
S,t =
( ∑ q
l=1 RRt−l
∑ q
l=1 RR∆
t−l
)
RR∆
t , (11)
where RRt ≡ RR1
t denotes the daily range. This is based upon the idea that the
daily range is (almost) not contaminated by microstructure noise and thus provides
8
a good indication of the true level of volatility. An importa nt choice to be made
when implementing this bias-adjustment is of course the num ber of trading days q
used to compute the scaling factor. If the trading intensity and the spread do not
change for the asset under consideration, q may be set as large as possible in order
to gain accuracy. Of course, in practice both features tend t o vary over time, which
suggests that only the recent price history should be used an d q should not be set
too large. We return to this issue below.
We close this section by discussing several alternatives fo r bias-correcting the
RV ∆
t estimator that have been put forward recently and that will b e included in the
subsequent analysis. First, the scaling procedure suggest ed for the realized range
also can be applied to the realized variance estimator. That is, the scaled realized
variance, RV ∆
S,t, may be obtained from (11) by replacing RR with RV . See Hansen
and Lunde (2005) for a theoretical justiﬁcation of this scal ing estimator.
Second, the eﬀect of bid-ask bounce (and presumably other ty pes of microstruc-
ture noise) can be removed by adding autocovariances to the r ealized variance. In
particular, we consider the RV ∆
AC1,t estimator, which incorporates the ﬁrst-order
autocovariance,
RV ∆
AC1,t =
I∑
i=1
r2
t−1+i∆ ,∆ + 2
I∑
i=2
rt−1+i∆ ,∆ rt−1+(i−1)∆ ,∆ . (12)
We refer to Barndorﬀ-Nielsen et al. (2004) and Hansen and Lun de (2005, 2006b) for
an in-depth analysis of the properties of this realized vari ance estimator.
Third, Zhang et al. (2005) develop the so-called two time-sc ales (TTS) estimator,
which combines realized variance estimators obtained from returns sampled at two
diﬀerent frequencies. In particular, the realized varianc e estimator obtained using
a certain (low) frequency is corrected for bias due to micros tructure noise using
the realized variance obtained with the highest available s ampling frequency. The
essential argument is that the low-frequency estimator ren ders a biased estimate of
the true integrated variance with the bias being a function o f the variance of the noise
in the return processes. The realized variance estimator us ing the highest possible
frequency consistently estimates this noise variance and c an therefore be used to
9
reduce and potentially even eliminate the bias of the low-fr equency estimator. In
addition, subsampling is used to reduce the variance of the l ow-frequency realized
variance estimator as follows. Assume that we observe N + 1 equidistant prices
during the trading day, where N is an integer multiple of I, the number of intra-day
intervals corresponding to a particular sampling frequenc y. In that case, the grid of
intervals of length ∆ = 1 /I can be laid over the trading day in N/I diﬀerent ways.
For example, in case prices observed once every minute, for t he realized variance
based on the ﬁve-minute sampling frequency rather than star ting with the interval
9:30-9:35 one could also start with 9:31-9:35, 9:32-9:37, 9 :33-9:38 or 9:34-9:39. In
this way ﬁve ‘subsamples’ are created and each of these can be used to compute
the realized variance. The ﬁnal realized variance is then ta ken to be the average
across subsamples. A practical problem with this procedure is how to treat the
loose ends at the start and the end of the trading session. Her e we omit these and
proportionally inﬂate the realized variances for the missi ng part of the trading day.
Based on the above, the two time-scales estimator RV ∆
T T S,t is obtained as
RV ∆
T T S,t = N
N − I
(
RV ∆
Subs,t − I
N RVM ax,t
)
, (13)
where RV ∆
Subs,t is the subsampling estimator using returns over intervals o f length ∆
with I = ( I − 1) + I/N being the average number of intraday return observations
used by each of the realized variance estimators used in the s ubsampling process, and
RVM ax,t is the realized variance based on the highest possible sampl ing frequency
using all N return observations.
3 Simulation
We simulate prices for 24-hour days, assuming that trading c an occur round the
clock. For each day t, the initial price is set equal to 1, and subsequent log price s
are simulated using
log Pt+j/J = log Pt+(j−1)/J + ε t+j/J , j = 1, 2, . . . , J, (14)
10
where J is the number of prices per day. To approximate the ideal situ ation with
continuous trading and no market frictions we simulate 100 p rices per second, such
that J = 8, 640, 000 as there are 86,400 seconds in a 24-hour day. The shocks ε t+j/J
are independent and normally distributed with mean zero and variance σ 2/ (D ·J),
where total annualized standard deviation σ of the log price process is set equal to
0.21 (21%), and D is the number of trading days in a year, which we set equal to
250. We simulate prices for 5000 trading days in all experime nts reported below.
To illustrate the promise of realized range as a measure of (d aily) volatility we
compute both the realized range and the realized variance fo r the prices simulated
in the ideal world as described above. To do so we divide the tr ading day into x-
minute intervals, which is called the x-minute frequency. For example when x = 1
we divide the 24-hour day into 1440 1-minute intervals. For t he realized variance
the squared 1-minute returns are summed to obtain the realiz ed variance at that
frequency. For the realized range the high and low are comput ed per 1-minute
interval and the resulting 1-minute ranges are summed to obt ain the realized range
for the day. We also consider the scaled versions of the reali zed range and the
realized variance computed according to (11). In subsequen t experiments with non-
trading and bid-ask bounce, the characteristics of these mi crostructure frictions are
identical for all trading days, such that we can use a large nu mber of trading days q
to compute the scaling factor. We therefore set we set q = 5000 to fully explore the
possibilities of the scaling bias-adjustment procedure. T he sensitivity of the results
with respect to the value of q is discussed in more detail below. Finally, the RV ∆
AC1,t
kernel-based estimator and the two time-scales estimator RV ∆
T T S,t are included. For
the latter we use all observed prices to compute the realized variance at the highest
possible frequency to obtain an accurate estimate of varian ce of the measurement
noise, and implement the subsampling estimator by shifting the intra-day intervals
ten seconds at a time. For each selected frequency we compute the mean and Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for the various volatility estima tors, taken over 5000
simulated trading days. The results are presented in Table 1 .
- insert Table 1 about here -
11
For x = 1440 minutes (the ﬁnal row in the table) the realized range e quals
the daily high-low range and the realized variance equals th e daily squared return.
As expected the RMSE of the range is substantially lower at 2. 564 than that for
the daily squared return at 5.664, reﬂecting the fact that th e daily range is ﬁve
times more eﬃcient than the daily squared return. Akin to the ﬁndings of Andersen
and Bollerslev (1998) and Brandt and Diebold (2006) the real ized variance requires
the 4-hour (240 minutes) frequency to achieve a similar RMSE as the daily range.
Obviously in this case the RMSE of the realized range is alway s substantially lower
than that of the realized variance at the same frequency. We a lso observe that the
RMSE of the TTS estimator is lower than the RMSE of the corresp onding realized
variance estimator, because of the reduction in variance du e to the subsampling
used. This is not suﬃcient though to achieve the same eﬃcienc y as the realized
range estimator. Finally, in the absence of microstructure noise, the RMSE of the
RV ∆
AC1,t estimator is about 1.7 times the RMSE of the standard realize d variance,
cf. the theoretical results of Hansen and Lunde (2005, 2006b ).
From Table 1 it appears that the realized range is slightly do wnward biased for
the highest frequencies (the true variance is 4.41). This is inherent to the nature of
the high-low range: In case the price path is not observed con tinuously (in our case
we observe ‘only’ 6000 prices per minute) the observed minim um and maximum
over- and underestimate the true high and low prices, respec tively, such that the
observed range underestimates the true range. To investiga te this problem in more
detail Table 2 shows the results when infrequent trading occ urs, such that the price
is observed on average only every τ = 10 seconds. That is, given the simulated paths
underlying Table 1, the probability to observe the price is e qual to π = 1/ (100τ ).
- insert Table 2 about here -
The results for the realized range show that the RMSE ﬁrst dec lines when in-
creasing the sampling frequency up to the 30-minute frequen cy. Then it increases
again for higher frequencies because the increase in the bia s due to non-trading (and
hence underestimating the range for each intra-day interva l) then outweighs the re-
12
duction in the standard deviation of the estimates. The diﬀe rent realized variance
estimators are not aﬀected by infrequent trading, except fo r a slight increase in the
(standard deviation and thus in) RMSE. As a result at the 30-m inute frequency,
for example, the realized range still is a more accurate vola tility measure than the
corresponding realized variance, but at the 5-minute frequ ency the realized variance
has a substantially lower RMSE than the realized range. Of co urse the exact fre-
quency at which one estimator improves over the other will de pend on the trading
intensity. For example when observing a price on average eve ry second the realized
range improves over the realized variance up to the 5-minute frequency. Unreported
results using the bias-correction procedures of Rogers and Satchell (1991) and Chris-
tensen and Podolskij (2005), which are explicitly designed for handling the eﬀects of
infrequent trading, shows that both procedures work satisf actorily, in the sense that
they largely remove the bias in the realized range estimator s, even for the highest
frequencies. The results for RR∆
S,t in Table 2 demonstrates that scaling the realized
range does not eliminate the bias completely, which is due to the fact that the daily
range also is somewhat biased downward due to the infrequent trading. In terms of
RMSE, the scaling procedure is slightly better than the Roge rs-Satchell procedure,
and only slightly worse than the Christensen-Podolskij pro cedure. For example, at
the 5-minute frequency the RMSE of RR∆
S,t is equal to 0.205, compared to 0.229
and 0.187 for the bias-corrected realized range estimators based upon (9) and (10),
respectively.
As noted in the previous section, the number of trading days q used to compute
the scaling factor for RR∆
S,t is a crucial choice to be made. If the trading intensity
and the spread are constant over time, q may be set large in order to gain accuracy.
On the other hand, when the magnitude of these microstructur e frictions varies
over time, only the recent price history should be used and q should be set fairly
small. Figure 1 shows the RMSE of the scaled realized range fo r the experiment with
infrequent trading as a function of q, with the rightmost point of each line showing
the RMSE for q = 5000 as given in Table 2. The RMSE monotonically declines as
q increases, but the largest gains occur up to q = 500, beyond which the RMSE
13
more or less stabilizes. Also note that the reduction in RMSE due to increasing q is
largest for higher sampling frequencies.
- insert Figure 1 about here -
Next, we consider the eﬀects of bid-ask bounce. For this purp ose we assume that
transactions take place either at the ask price or at the bid p rice, which are equal to
the true price plus and minus half the spread, respectively. Hence, if a transaction
occurs at t + j/J , the actually observed price P ∗
t+j/J is equal to Pt+j/J + s/ 2 (ask) or
Pt+j/J − s/ 2 (bid), where s is the bid-ask spread and Pt+j/J is the true price obtained
from (14). As in Brandt and Diebold (2006), we set s = 0 . 0005 (or 0.05% of the
starting price of 1) and assume that bid and ask prices occur e qually likely.
The results in Table 3 show that as expected both realized ran ge and realized
variance suﬀer upward bias, which gets worse as the sampling frequency increases.
The bias in the realized range is caused by the fact that in the limit the observed
range will overestimate the true range by exactly the spread , as the maximum price
will be an ask and the minimum price will be a bid. The realized variance is biased
upwards because half of the times (when the return is compute d from bid to ask or
from ask to bid) the squared bid-ask spread is included. The r ealized range is aﬀected
more by the bid-ask bounce than the realized variance, when c omparing them at
the same sampling frequency. In this particular parameter s etting the realized range
outperforms the realized variance up to the 1-hour (60-minu te) frequency. For higher
sampling frequencies the RMSE of the realized variance is lo wer. Scaling the realized
range works remarkably well, in the sense that the bias is rem oved completely and
the RMSE values are brought back to the original level observ ed for RR∆
t in the
ideal case without bid-ask bounce shown in Table 1, or even sl ightly below. The
unreported results for the bias-correction procedures of R ogers and Satchell (1991)
and Christensen and Podolskij (2005) show that logically th ey completely fail to
correct for the bid-ask bounce eﬀects. Scaling the realized variance also removes a
large part of the bias, but at frequencies higher than 60 minu tes, say, the RSME
remains substantially higher than the RMSE of RV ∆
t in Table 1. As expected, both
14
RV ∆
T T S,t and RV ∆
AC1,t are robust to the presence of bid-ask bounce. Note that the
scaled realized range outperforms the TTS estimator (and th erefore the kernel-based
estimator as well) at all frequencies considered.
- insert Table 3 about here -
Finally, we consider the realistic situation where both bid -ask bounce and in-
frequent trading are present, combining the speciﬁcations for these two frictions as
discussed before. Results of this experiment are shown in Ta ble 4. The realized
range still suﬀers from an upward bias, but of a considerably smaller magnitude
than in the case of bid-ask bounce only due to the oﬀ-setting n egative bias induced
by infrequent trading. As a result, the realized range now ha s a lower RMSE than
the realized variance up to the 30-minute frequency, as well as at the 1-minute fre-
quency. In addition the overall minimum RMSE is obtained at 0 .749 for the realized
range at the 45-minute frequency. For the realized variance the optimal frequency
is the 10-minute frequency for which the RMSE is 0.717, hence only slightly smaller
than that for the optimal realized range. Also here we ﬁnd tha t scaling the realized
range works adequately in removing the bias and bringing the RMSE of the RR∆
S,t
estimator down to the levels originally observed in the case of no market microstruc-
ture frictions. Finally, again we observe that the two time- scales estimator and the
kernel-based estimator remain unbiased, but their RMSEs ar e higher than those of
the scaled realized range.
- insert Table 4 about here -
Concluding, the simulation experiments quite convincingl y demonstrate the po-
tential of the realized range as a measure of volatility. In c ase of continuous trading
and no market frictions it always improves upon the popular r ealized variance when
using the same sampling frequency. In reality trading is dis continuous and observed
prices are bid and ask prices. In that case scaling the realiz ed range with the average
(relative) level of the daily range is an eﬀective procedure to remove the induced bias
and restore the eﬃciency of the realized range. Of course the se results are obtained
15
assuming a speciﬁc price process that may aﬀect the results. In particular, we have
assumed that the microstructure noise is temporally indepe ndent and independent
from the true price process. As discussed in Hansen and Lunde (2006b), there is
substantial empirical evidence against both these assumpt ions at ultra-high frequen-
cies. Further investigation of the properties of the realiz ed range estimator under
more general speciﬁcations of the noise process is therefor e warranted. As such it
will also be interesting to look at its performance for actua l market data in Sections
4 and 5 below.
4 S&P500 index futures
The S&P500 index-futures contract is the largest equity fut ures contract in the
world. It is trading virtually round the clock, with ﬂoor tra ding on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME) from 9:30 to 16:15 Eastern Standa rd Time (EST), and
electronic trading on GLOBEX almost 24 hours a day apart from Friday evening
to Sunday evening. Our sample contains transaction prices a nd bid and ask quotes
running from 4 January 1999 to 23 February 2004. The S&P500 fu tures contract
has maturities in March, June, September and December. We al ways use the most
liquid contract (usually until 1 week before the maturity of that contract) and make
sure that when changing from one contract to the next, we neve r compute returns
based on prices from two diﬀerent contracts. For the 1289 day s in the sample period
this results in on average 3,223 transaction prices during ﬂ oor trading from 9:30 to
16:15 EST and 1,802 transactions during the remainder of the day with a substantial
number taking place in the run-up to the opening of the New Yor k Stock Exchange
(NYSE) at 9:30 EST. The spread is relatively small but varies considerably over time.
For example, for the September 2001 contract the average spr ead (based on bid and
ask quotes with the same time stamp to the nearest second) is 0 .443 index-points on
an average futures price of 1190 (0.037%), whereas for the De cember 2003 contract it
is 0.220 on an average price of 1039 (0.018%). Hence such a liq uid contract does not
exactly reﬂect the ideal situation with continuous trading and no market frictions,
16
but it is not far oﬀ either. In Section 5 we will repeat some of t he analysis below for
the S&P100 index constituents that provide much more noisy d ata. The variation
in the average spread implies that the ratio of the average le vel of the daily range
relative to the average level of the realized range changes o ver time. For this reason
we compute the scaling factor for RR∆
S,t in (11) using the previous q = 66 trading
days or approximately three months.
4.1 Characteristics of realized range
Initially we follow Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Eben s (2001) (henceforth
ABDE) by documenting the characteristics of the realized ra nge deﬁned in (5) mea-
sured using ﬁve-minute intervals from 9:30-16:15 EST (as in ABDE) and 15-minute
intervals from 16:15 to 9:30 EST. For comparison we also incl ude the properties of a
number of other estimators. Table 5 shows selected sample st atistics for the squared
daily returns, r2
t , the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), the scaled
realized range and realized variance ( RR∆
S,t and RV ∆
S,t), the two time-scales estimator
(RV ∆
T T S,t) and the kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t).
- insert Table 5 about here -
The mean daily squared (close-to-close) return is 1.792 imp lying an annualized
standard deviation for the S&P500 index of around 21.4%. The mean realized vari-
ance is close to this (1.818), whereas as expected the realiz ed range has a lower
average at 1.533. Hence it seems that bid-ask bounce is not a c rucial issue at the se-
lected sampling frequency, whereas not observing a continu ous path of prices causes
a downward bias in the realized range. This problem will obvi ously increase for
higher frequencies. We return to this point below when consi dering results for other
sampling frequencies. Here we note that scaling the realize d range with the ratio of
the average level of the daily range for the previous q = 66 days, as in (11), increases
the average to 1.750, more in line with the realized variance .
Both the realized variance and the realized range are right- skewed and leptokur-
tic, although less so for the realized range than for the real ized variance. The stan-
17
dard deviation of the daily squared returns is 3.263, substa ntially higher than the
standard deviation of the realized variance at 1.879. This i s in line with the notion
that both measures are unbiased but realized volatility is l ess noisy. The standard
deviation of the TTS estimator is only slightly lower at 1.84 0, while that of the
kernel-based RV ∆
AC1,t estimator is higher at 1.942. This also suggests that the eﬀe cts
of microstructure noise are limited for the S&P500 index-fu tures contract. Finally,
we observe that the realized range is even less noisy with a st andard deviation of
1.408. Even after adjusting for the bias the standard deviat ion remains below that
of the realized variance at 1.678, underlining the potentia l of the realized range
estimator.
ABDE report that daily returns standardized with the realiz ed standard devia-
tions are approximately Gaussian for the 30 Dow Jones stocks . Table 6 reports the
corresponding results for the realized range. The results i n the ﬁrst column for the
daily returns show that normality is rejected at convention al signiﬁcance levels. For
the daily returns standardized with the square root of the (s caled) realized range,
however, the sample kurtosis is reduced to 2.814 (2.800) fro m 4.310 for the raw re-
turns. Note that the Jarque-Bera test statistic is asymptot ically χ 2(2), with a 5%
critical value of 5.99 (1%: 9.21). Hence for the daily return s standardized with the
(square root of the) (scaled) realized range the null hypoth esis of normality cannot
be rejected. In contrast, for the daily S&P500 returns stand ardized with the (scaled)
realized standard deviation the null of normality is reject ed at the 5% signiﬁcance
level.
- insert Table 6 about here -
We examine the eﬀect of the sampling frequency on the propert ies of the realized
range by varying the length of the intra-day intervals. For t he ﬂoor trading period be-
tween 9:30 and 16:15 EST (405 minutes) we consider x ∈ {1, 2. 5, 5, 15, 27, 33. 75, 45, 81, 405}
minutes, and for the electronic trading period from 16:15 to 9:30 EST (1035 minutes)
we consider x ∈ {5, 15, 45, 115, 207, 1035} minutes. All 54 combinations are tracked.
For a selection of these combinations, Table 7 reports the me an and standard devi-
18
ation of the realized range and the realized variance and the scaled versions thereof,
as well as the two time-scales estimator and the ﬁrst-order k ernel-based estimator.
- insert Table 7 about here -
For both the realized range and the realized variance the sta ndard deviation de-
creases for higher sampling frequencies, as expected. At th e same time, the mean
of the realized range decreases, suggesting that the downwa rd bias induced by in-
frequent trading dominates the upward bias due to bid-ask bo unce. For the realized
variance the mean actually increases for the highest sampli ng frequencies. This is
also expected because bid-ask bounce will play a relatively more important role at
those frequencies, while realized variance is not aﬀected b y infrequent trading. We
also observe a considerable (and unexpected) increase in th e mean for the two time-
scale estimator as the sampling frequency increases. Scali ng (again using q = 66)
stabilizes the mean of both realized range and realized vari ance across frequencies,
but comes at the cost of an increased standard deviation. Not e though that at high
sampling frequencies the standard deviation of the realize d range remains below that
of all realized variance estimators, including the two time -scales estimator.
4.2 Measuring and forecasting: realized range vis-` a-vis r e-
alized variance
The ultimate objective is to ﬁnd the most accurate way of meas uring and forecasting
volatility. How to decide, however, on the best volatility m easure if we need that
measure to evaluate the candidates? To avoid biasing the res ults one way or another
when comparing realized variance and realized range, we fol low Beckers’ (1983)
ideas. Beckers (1983) compares the predictive ability of th e squared daily close-to-
close return and the daily high-low range estimator, testin g each one as a predictor
of itself and of the alternative volatility measure. The com parison is implemented
by regressing each of the variance estimators on either its o wn lagged value or its
competitor’s. If one volatility measure dominates the othe r, one would expect to see
a higher R2 for that approach regardless of the choice of the left-hand- side variable
19
in the regression. Similarly an encompassing regression ca n be used. Here the same
procedure will be applied, but now for comparing the (scaled ) realized range with
the (scaled) realized variance and with the TTS estimator. S ince potential biases
are not captured by the regression R2, in addition we also inspect the Mean Squared
Error (MSE) and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE). To test the sig niﬁcance of the
diﬀerences between realized variance and realized range th e Diebold and Mariano
(1995) test statistic is used. Let yt be the realized variance or the realized range on
day t, and let ˆyit and ˆyjt denote the forecasts (one is lagged realized variance or the
lagged TTS estimator, the other lagged realized range). The test statistic is
DM = d√
ˆV (dt) /T
d
→ N (0, 1) , (15)
where d is the sample mean loss diﬀerential d = 1
T
∑ T
t=1 dt, and where ˆV (dt) is a
consistent estimate of the asymptotic variance of dt. Given that we only consider
one-step ahead forecasts, we use ˆV (
d) = 1
T
∑ T
t=1
(
dt −
d
) 2
. The loss diﬀerential
series dt depends on the evaluation criterion for the forecast errors . In particular:
R2 : dt = (yt − ˆα i − ˆβ iˆyit)2 − (yt − ˆα j − ˆβ j ˆyjt)2
1
T
∑ T
t−1(yt −
y)2
,
MSE : dt = (yt − ˆyit)2 − (yt − ˆyjt)2,
MAE : dt = |yt − ˆyit| − |yt − ˆyjt|.
In these three cases rejecting the null hypothesis that d = 0 implies that there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between forecast i and forecast j. Harvey et al. (1998) propose
a similar test for encompassing regressions based on,
ENC : dt = (ˆyjt − ˆyit)(yt − ˆyit).
Here rejecting the null hypothesis indicates forecast j has useful information not
already impounded in forecast i.
Beckers (1983) basically uses the lagged (raw) variance mea sures as forecasts for
the current variance. In addition the analysis will be repea ted following Fleming et
al. (2003) in adjusting the conditional variances and produ cing rolling forecasts based
20
on exponentially declining weights, building upon the work by Foster and Nelson
(1996) and Andreou and Ghysels (2002) on rolling volatility estimators. Consider
the following model for close-to-close returns,
rt = σ tzt,
with zt ∼ iid(0, 1) and
σ 2
t = exp(− α )σ 2
t−1 + α exp(− α )Vt−1, (16)
where Vt is the measure of volatility for day t used to update the conditional vari-
ances. In our case that could be the squared close-to-close r eturn, the daily high-low
range, the (scaled) realized range, the (scaled) realized v ariance or the two time-
scales estimator. Following Fleming et al. (2003), we adjus t the conditional vari-
ances in (16) obtained using the ‘raw’ realized range and rea lized variance for bias
by scaling with the conditional variances based on the daily counterparts, as in (11),
i.e. the daily squared returns for the realized variance and the daily high-low range
for the realized range. We set the number of trading days q used to estimate the
bias adjustment coeﬃcient to 66 as before. The decay paramet er α and the bias ad-
justments (which are functions of α ) are estimated simultaneously using maximum
likelihood for the full sample. To load the conditional vari ances in (16) we use the
ﬁrst 100 realized ranges (variances), and we also drop those 100 observations from
the analysis to preserve the same ‘forecast’ period.
To compare the realized range and realized variance estimat ors with the proce-
dure outlined above several variants are tested. First, thr ee sampling frequencies
are considered: 1/5 (one-minute intervals from 9:30-16:15 EST, ﬁve-minute intervals
from 16:15-9:30 EST), 5/15, and 27/45 minutes. Second, the i ssue of market closure
is addressed by not only looking at the close-to-close 24-ho ur day, but also only at the
open-to-close period (9:30-16:15 EST for the S&P500 index- futures, 9:30-16:00 EST
for the individual stocks in Section 5). Third, closely rela ted to this is the presence
of large outliers in especially the realized variance serie s of the individual stocks for
the close-to-close period, often caused by a large overnigh t return. Therefore next
21
to the unadjusted series results are also reported when all v ariance measures are
truncated at the median plus or minus four times the median ab solute deviation. 2
The results for the S&P500 index-futures are reported in Tab les 8 to 13. Re-
gardless of the sampling frequency, the outlier adjustment s, or close-to-close versus
open-to-close, the unadjusted realized range performs sig niﬁcantly better than the
realized variance with only a few exceptions, as shown in Tab le 8. The main ex-
ceptions are at the one-minute frequency with realized vari ance as the forecasting
target yt and the MSE or MAE as performance measures. This can be explai ned
by the fact that the realized range is severely downward bias ed at the one-minute
frequency as shown in Table 7. The logical next step is theref ore to look at the scaled
versions of the realized variance and the realized range in T able 9. Here we do see
an improved performance of the realized range at the one-min ute frequency. The
overall picture remains that the (scaled) realized range is superior. The encompass-
ing regressions even suggest the (scaled) realized varianc e contains no incremental
information beyond that already captured by the (scaled) re alized range.
- insert Tables 8-10 about here -
In the simulation experiments in Section 3 we found that the T TS estimator
came closest to the performance of the scaled realized range in the presence of
market microstructure noise. Table 10 reports the correspo nding results for the
S&P500, showing that also for this empirical application th e TTS estimator does a
better job than the (scaled) realized variance. Still the nu mber of signiﬁcant results
in Table 10 is 61-4 in favour of the scaled realized range. Thi s is perhaps a bit
surprising in light of the simulation results. In our opinio n, it mainly illustrates the
robustness of scaling as a bias-adjustment procedure compa red to a bias-corrected
estimator based on speciﬁc model assumptions. The data gene rating process in
our simulation experiment exactly satisﬁes the conditions under which the TTS
estimator was derived, but the actual data probably do not co mpletely adhere to
2See Hansen and Lunde (2006a) and Patton (2005) for extensive discussion of pitfalls in forecast
evaluation for volatility models, when a proxy is substitut ed for the unobserved volatility.
22
those conditions.
So far we considered random walk forecasts. Tables 11 to 13 pr ovide the cor-
responding results for the rolling forecasts following the procedure of Fleming et
al. (2003). Here the improved forecast performance of the (s caled) realized range
relative to the (scaled) realized variance and the TTS estim ator are even more pro-
nounced than before. Counting the number of signiﬁcant resu lts across the entire
table we now get 74-5 in Table 11 (was 77-6 in Table 8), 92-0 in T able 12 (was 80-1
in Table 9), and 82-0 in Table 13 (was 61-4 in Table 10), all in f avour of the realized
range.
- insert Tables 11-13 about here -
5 S&P100 constituents
Obviously the analysis in the previous section only conside rs 1 particular asset,
the S&P500 index-futures, which is an extremely liquid asse t with a small bid-ask
spread. With the main issue at stake being whether the realiz ed range better deals
with market microstructure than the realized variance this could provide a biased
picture. For that reason we also consider the individual sto cks in the S&P100 index
(constituents in June 2004), where the data consists of open , high, low and close
transaction prices at the one-minute frequency. For most st ocks the sample period
runs from April 9, 1997, to June 18, 2004 (1808 daily observat ions). Table 14 reports
some sample statistics on the distribution of the 100 (scale d) realized ranges based
on the ﬁve-minute frequency from 9:30 to 16:00 EST, in additi on to the close-to-open
squared return. This table is similar in nature to the one in A BDE for the realized
variance of the 30 Dow Jones stocks.
- insert Table 14 about here -
The average realized range at 4.798 and the average standard deviation of the
range at 3.637 are both larger for the individual stocks comp ared to that for the
S&P500 index-futures. The large skewness and kurtosis is pa rtly the result of large
23
overnight returns after disappointing ﬁrm-speciﬁc news an nouncements. The general
features are similar for the scaled realized range. Obvious ly for stocks where the
infrequent trading bias dominates the mean is scaled upward s (e.g. in the lowest
percentile), and for stocks where the bid-ask bounce bias do minates the mean is
scaled downwards (e.g. in the highest percentile).
Again we compare the realized range and realized variance, a long the lines de-
scribed in Section 4. We do not consider the two time-scale es timator here as the
highest available sampling frequency only is one minute. Th e results are presented
in Table 15 to 17, where we record a DM test either as a win for re alized variance
(1-0), a win for realized range (0-1), or undecided (0-0) usi ng a 5% signiﬁcance level
in a one-sided test. Note that for the encompassing test it is possible that both score
a win (1-1). The results in Table 15 indicate that in particul ar for the popular ﬁve-
and 30-minute frequencies the realized range performs sign iﬁcantly better than the
realized variance. Only for the one-minute frequency the re alized variance performs
signiﬁcantly better than the realized range when realized v ariance is used to evalu-
ate both, whereas the realized range outperforms the realiz ed variance when realized
range is used to evaluate both. Of all signiﬁcant diﬀerences 80% are in favour of the
realized range.
- insert Tables 15-16 about here -
Table 16 shows the results for the scaled versions of the real ized variance and
the realized range. The results are similar to the ones in 15 i n the sense that still
about 80% of the signiﬁcant diﬀerences are in favour of the sc aled realized range.
There are, however, a few notable diﬀerences. Most of these o ccur when using the
MSE and MAE, where the volatility measure that is not used as t he forecast target
is now more often winning. A logical explanation for this is t hat these measures
increase for large diﬀerences in the levels of the actual vol atility and the forecast.
As we already have seen in the simulation experiments at the h ighest frequencies
we consider here the realized range has a higher average than the realized variance
in the presence of both non-trading and bid-ask bounce. This diﬀerence is removed
24
when using the scaled versions.
Producing rolling forecasts following Fleming et al. (2003 ), Table 17 clearly
favours the realized range. Now 88% of all signiﬁcant result s favour the realized
range. The additional gains come especially for the R-squar ed and the encompass-
ing regression measures.
- insert Table 17 about here -
To further analyse the eﬀect of non-trading on the realized r ange, we look at
the relation between trading activity in a stock and the win- loss ratio. In particular
we construct a variable that counts per stock the number of wi ns for the realized
variance minus the number of wins for the realized range, tak en over all instances
covered by Tables 15 to 17 (so open-to-close, with and withou t outliers, etc.). We
measure trading activity by the average number of minutes pe r day without a trade.
When regressing the win-loss diﬀerence on this (non-)tradi ng activity variable we
ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant negative relationship. Hen ce, the realized range is more
likely to win if a stock is more actively traded. Obviously in this case we move closer
to the S&P500 example where results were strongly in favour f or the realized range.
6 Concluding remarks
In this paper we studied the properties and merits of the ‘rea lized range’, a measure
of daily volatility computed by summing high-low ranges for intra-day intervals. In
theory the high-low range is a more eﬃcient estimator of vola tility than the squared
return. Hence, just like the daily high-low range improves o ver the daily squared
return, the ‘realized range’ should improve over the ‘reali zed variance’ obtained by
summing squared returns for intra-day intervals. Theoreti cally that is. In practice we
need to account for market frictions such as bid-ask bounce a nd infrequent trading.
For this purpose, we proposed a bias-adjustment procedure f or the realized range
estimator, which involves scaling the realized range with t he ratio of the average
level of the daily range and the average level of the realized range.
25
A simulation experiment ﬁrst conﬁrms that in theory indeed t he realized range is
a better volatility measure than the realized variance when using the same sampling
frequency. This no longer is true for the highest sampling fr equencies in the case of
infrequent trading as this leads to a downward bias in the rea lized range and does
not aﬀect the realized variance. When allowing for bid-ask b ounce both realized
range and realized variance are upward biased, but the reali zed range suﬀers more
as the minimum (maximum) is often half a spread below (above) the true minimum
(maximum). In the presence of these market microstructure f rictions, scaling the
realized range with the average (relative) level of the dail y range turns out to be an
eﬀective procedure to remove the induced bias and restore th e eﬃciency of the real-
ized range. In particular, the scaled realized range outper forms popular corrections
of the realized variance for microstructure noise, includi ng the two time-scales esti-
mator of Zhang et al. (2005) and the kernel-based estimators considered by Hansen
and Lunde (2006b).
For the S&P500 index-futures we come closest in practice to t he ideal situation of
continuous trading and no market frictions. As expected the simulation results are
conﬁrmed in that the (scaled) realized range improves signi ﬁcantly over the (scaled)
realized variance as well as the two time-scales estimator a s a measure for daily
volatility. For the constituents of the S&P100 index all ing redients of market frictions
are present, with bid-ask bounce, discontinuous trading an d large (overnight) jumps.
The results are more mixed here, but realized range still sig niﬁcantly improves over
realized variance for the popular sampling frequencies of ﬁ ve and 30 minutes.
26
References
A ¨ ıt-Sahalia, Y., P.A. Mykland and L. Zhang, 2005, How oftento sample a continuous-time
process in the presence of market microstructure noise. Rev iew of Financial Studies 18,
351–416.
Alizadeh, S., 1998, Essays in Financial Econometrics. Depa rtment of Economics, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Ph.D. Dissertation.
Alizadeh, S., M.W. Brandt and F.X. Diebold, 2002, Range-bas ed estimation of stochastic
volatility models. Journal of Finance 47, 1047–1092.
Andersen, T.G. and T. Bollerslev, 1998, Answering the skept ics: Yes, standard volatility
models do provide accurate forecasts. International Econo mic Review 39, 885–905.
Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold and H. Ebens, 20 01a, The distribution of
realized stock return volatility. Journal of Financial Eco nomics 61, 43–76.
Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold and P. Labys, 20 01b. The distribution of
realized exchange rate volatility. Journal of the American Statistical Association 96,
42–55.
Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold and P. Labys, 20 03, Modeling and forecasting
realized volatility. Econometrica 71, 579–625.
Andreou, E. and E. Ghysels, 2002, Rolling-sample volatilit y estimators: some new theo-
retical, simulation and empirical results. Journal of Busi ness and Economic Statistics
20, 363–376.
Bali, T.G. and D. Weinbaum, 2005, A comparative study of alte rnative extreme-value
volatility estimators. Journal of Futures Markets 25, 873– 892.
Bandi, F.M. and J.R. Russell, 2005a, Microstructure noise, realized variance, and optimal
sampling. Graduate School of Business, University of Chica go, working paper.
Bandi, F.M. and J.R. Russell, 2005b, Separating microstruc ture noise from volatility. Jour-
nal of Financial Economics, to appear.
Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O.E. and N. Shephard, 2002, Econometric analysis of realised volatility
and its use in estimating stochastic volatility models. Jou rnal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series B 64, 253–280.
Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O.E., P.R. Hansen, A. Lunde and N. Shepha rd, 2004, Regular and
modiﬁed kernel-based estimators of integrated variance: T he case of independent noise.
Oxford Financial Research Centre Economics Series 2004-FE -20.
Beckers, S., 1983, Variances of security price returns base d on high, low, and closing prices.
Journal of Business 56, 97–112.
Brandt, M.W. and F.X. Diebold, 2006, A no-arbitrage approac h to range-based estimation
of return covariances and correlations. Journal of Busines s 79, 61–74.
Brown, S., 1990, Estimating volatility, in: S. Figlewski, W . Silber and M. Subramanyam,
(Eds.), Financial options: From theory to practice, Busine ss One Irwin, Homewood IL.,
pp. 516–537.
27
Christensen, K. and M. Podolskij, 2005, Realized range-bas ed estimation of integrated
variance. Aarhus School of Business, manuscript.
Diebold, F.X. and R.S. Mariano, 1995, Comparing predictive accuracy. Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 13, 253–263.
Fleming, J., C. Kirby and B. Ostdiek, 2003, The economic valu e of volatility timing using
‘realized’ volatility. Journal of Financial Economics 67, 473–509.
Foster, D.P. and D.B. Nelson, 1996, Continuous record asymp totics for rolling sample
variance estimators. Econometrica 64, 139–174.
Garman, M.B. and M.J. Klass, 1980, On the estimation of secur ity price volatilities from
historical data. Journal of Business 53, 67–78.
Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde, 2005, A realized variance for the w hole day based on inter-
mittent high-frequency data. Journal of Financial Econome trics 3, 525–554.
Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde, 2006a, Consistent ranking of vola tility models. Journal of
Econometrics, to appear.
Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde, 2006b, Realized variance and mark et microstructure noise.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, to appear.
Harvey, D.I., S.J. Leybourne and P. Newbold, 1998, Tests for forecast encompassing.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 16, 254–259.
Kunitomo, N., 1992, Improving the Parkinson method of estim ating security price volatilites.
Journal of Business 65, 295–302.
Parkinson, M., 1980, The extreme value method for estimatin g the variance of the rate of
return. Journal of Business 53, 61–65.
Patton, A., 2005, Volatility forecast evaluation and compa rison using imperfect volatility
proxies. London School of Economics, manuscript.
Rogers, L.C.G. and S.E. Satchell, 1991, Estimating varianc e from high, low and closing
prices. Annals of Applied Probability 1, 504–512.
Yang, Z. and Q. Zhang, 2000, Drift-independent volatility e stimation based on high, low,
open, and close prices. Journal of Business 73, 477–491.
Zhang, L., P.A. Mykland and Y. A ¨ ıt-Sahalia, 2005, A tale of two time scales: Determining
integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data. Jou rnal of the American Statistical
Association 100, 1394–1411.
28
Table 1: Realized range and realized variance with continuo us trading and no market frictions
Frequency RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
(minutes) Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Me an RMSE
1 4 . 333 0 . 105 4 . 299 0 . 135 4 . 411 0 . 155 4 . 317 0 . 197 4 . 413 0 . 145 4 . 429 0 . 258
2 4 . 356 0 . 112 4 . 299 0 . 150 4 . 418 0 . 213 4 . 318 0 . 242 4 . 421 0 . 185 4 . 448 0 . 389
3 4 . 368 0 . 128 4 . 299 0 . 165 4 . 428 0 . 269 4 . 319 0 . 289 4 . 428 0 . 224 4 . 448 0 . 468
4 4 . 379 0 . 143 4 . 300 0 . 179 4 . 441 0 . 325 4 . 320 0 . 337 4 . 435 0 . 259 4 . 444 0 . 547
5 4 . 382 0 . 156 4 . 299 0 . 189 4 . 431 0 . 347 4 . 317 0 . 358 4 . 439 0 . 287 4 . 434 0 . 615
10 4 . 402 0 . 217 4 . 300 0 . 240 4 . 432 0 . 501 4 . 320 0 . 502 4 . 436 0 . 406 4 . 378 0 . 915
15 4 . 405 0 . 271 4 . 300 0 . 288 4 . 419 0 . 638 4 . 317 0 . 636 4 . 425 0 . 510 4 . 456 1 . 130
20 4 . 409 0 . 314 4 . 302 0 . 326 4 . 411 0 . 740 4 . 325 0 . 734 4 . 410 0 . 603 4 . 514 1 . 304
30 4 . 409 0 . 393 4 . 298 0 . 400 4 . 435 0 . 908 4 . 315 0 . 893 4 . 441 0 . 749 4 . 455 1 . 585
45 4 . 425 0 . 490 4 . 301 0 . 489 4 . 493 1 . 148 4 . 322 1 . 109 4 . 475 0 . 933 4 . 332 1 . 929
60 4 . 425 0 . 579 4 . 299 0 . 574 4 . 444 1 . 315 4 . 316 1 . 283 4 . 445 1 . 079 4 . 292 2 . 190
90 4 . 435 0 . 714 4 . 300 0 . 701 4 . 420 1 . 625 4 . 320 1 . 591 4 . 401 1 . 338 4 . 214 2 . 538
120 4 . 418 0 . 827 4 . 297 0 . 813 4 . 372 1 . 809 4 . 317 1 . 789 4 . 360 1 . 528 4 . 146 2 . 792
180 4 . 399 1 . 005 4 . 300 0 . 989 4 . 313 2 . 192 4 . 319 2 . 195 4 . 305 1 . 800 4 . 149 3 . 454
240 4 . 362 1 . 128 4 . 296 1 . 116 4 . 230 2 . 423 4 . 311 2 . 465 4 . 251 2 . 048 4 . 242 3 . 913
360 4 . 341 1 . 317 4 . 294 1 . 306 4 . 192 2 . 878 4 . 311 2 . 954 4 . 233 2 . 627 4 . 307 4 . 687
720 4 . 331 1 . 889 4 . 298 1 . 877 4 . 318 4 . 330 4 . 330 4 . 347 4 . 231 4 . 190 4 . 323 5 . 664
1440 4 . 287 2 . 564 4 . 287 2 . 564 4 . 323 5 . 664 4 . 323 5 . 664 4 . 323 5 . 664 4 . 323 5 . 664
Note: The table shows the results of a simulation experiment wher e 5000 days of 8,640,000 (log) prices (100 prices per second) are
simulated from a normal distribution with mean zero and vari ance 4.41 (21% standard deviation on an annual basis). All pr ices are
observed. For each day the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), the scaled realized
variance ( RV ∆
S,t), the two time-scales estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t) are computed for
various sampling frequencies shown in column 1. RR∆
S,t and RV ∆
S,t are obtained from (11) with q = 5000 (with RR replaced by RV
for the scaled realized variance).
29
Table 2: Realized range and realized variance with infreque nt trading
Frequency RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
(minutes) Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Me an RMSE
1 2 . 633 1 . 778 4 . 317 0 . 137 4 . 412 0 . 162 4 . 262 0 . 217 4 . 411 0 . 154 4 . 409 0 . 282
2 3 . 034 1 . 379 4 . 317 0 . 157 4 . 409 0 . 229 4 . 263 0 . 267 4 . 411 0 . 202 4 . 407 0 . 396
3 3 . 241 1 . 174 4 . 316 0 . 177 4 . 413 0 . 281 4 . 261 0 . 310 4 . 410 0 . 240 4 . 403 0 . 481
4 3 . 372 1 . 046 4 . 316 0 . 192 4 . 406 0 . 323 4 . 258 0 . 348 4 . 409 0 . 274 4 . 409 0 . 554
5 3 . 468 0 . 953 4 . 318 0 . 205 4 . 407 0 . 361 4 . 263 0 . 380 4 . 408 0 . 303 4 . 414 0 . 623
10 3 . 712 0 . 730 4 . 314 0 . 266 4 . 402 0 . 509 4 . 253 0 . 517 4 . 411 0 . 419 4 . 431 0 . 889
15 3 . 835 0 . 633 4 . 318 0 . 313 4 . 421 0 . 626 4 . 265 0 . 622 4 . 417 0 . 517 4 . 452 1 . 086
20 3 . 903 0 . 594 4 . 314 0 . 356 4 . 412 0 . 721 4 . 253 0 . 713 4 . 422 0 . 598 4 . 451 1 . 281
30 3 . 995 0 . 566 4 . 318 0 . 426 4 . 438 0 . 893 4 . 271 0 . 871 4 . 429 0 . 734 4 . 455 1 . 589
45 4 . 074 0 . 582 4 . 319 0 . 512 4 . 437 1 . 094 4 . 264 1 . 062 4 . 439 0 . 915 4 . 443 1 . 942
60 4 . 121 0 . 628 4 . 320 0 . 592 4 . 439 1 . 283 4 . 265 1 . 241 4 . 442 1 . 069 4 . 433 2 . 216
90 4 . 175 0 . 724 4 . 316 0 . 715 4 . 432 1 . 585 4 . 260 1 . 531 4 . 445 1 . 332 4 . 390 2 . 745
120 4 . 216 0 . 815 4 . 322 0 . 817 4 . 423 1 . 815 4 . 272 1 . 759 4 . 434 1 . 561 4 . 421 3 . 127
180 4 . 246 1 . 010 4 . 327 1 . 020 4 . 403 2 . 270 4 . 276 2 . 209 4 . 417 1 . 955 4 . 501 3 . 782
240 4 . 275 1 . 151 4 . 329 1 . 161 4 . 417 2 . 598 4 . 297 2 . 530 4 . 413 2 . 309 4 . 514 4 . 233
360 4 . 298 1 . 429 4 . 335 1 . 439 4 . 445 3 . 213 4 . 294 3 . 106 4 . 474 2 . 942 4 . 450 5 . 078
720 4 . 354 2 . 024 4 . 342 2 . 019 4 . 430 4 . 503 4 . 319 4 . 392 4 . 453 4 . 524 4 . 342 6 . 186
1440 4 . 353 2 . 799 4 . 353 2 . 799 4 . 342 6 . 186 4 . 342 6 . 186 4 . 342 6 . 186 4 . 342 6 . 186
Note: The table shows the results of a simulation experiment wher e 5000 days of 8,640,000 (log) prices (100 prices per second) are
simulated from a normal distribution with mean zero and vari ance 4.41 (21% standard deviation on an annual basis). Subse quently,
with probability π = 0 . 001 we observe a price and with probability 1 − π we do not. For each day the realized range ( RR∆
t ),
the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t), the two time-scales estimator
(RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t) are computed for various sampling frequencies shown in col umn 1.
RR∆
S,t and RV ∆
S,t are obtained from (11) with q = 5000 (with RR replaced by RV for the scaled realized variance).
30
Table 3: Realized range and realized variance with bid-ask b ounce
Frequency RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
(minutes) Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Me an RMSE
1 14 . 682 10 . 273 4 . 490 0 . 099 8 . 913 4 . 514 4 . 319 0 . 196 4 . 419 0 . 217 4 . 429 0 . 389
2 11 . 024 6 . 616 4 . 490 0 . 109 6 . 664 2 . 277 4 . 320 0 . 247 4 . 426 0 . 215 4 . 450 0 . 467
3 9 . 579 5 . 172 4 . 490 0 . 121 5 . 931 1 . 564 4 . 321 0 . 294 4 . 432 0 . 241 4 . 445 0 . 532
4 8 . 772 4 . 366 4 . 490 0 . 132 5 . 565 1 . 224 4 . 320 0 . 337 4 . 438 0 . 270 4 . 444 0 . 605
5 8 . 237 3 . 832 4 . 490 0 . 142 5 . 331 1 . 013 4 . 320 0 . 362 4 . 442 0 . 295 4 . 437 0 . 663
10 6 . 999 2 . 603 4 . 491 0 . 193 4 . 883 0 . 725 4 . 322 0 . 501 4 . 440 0 . 409 4 . 382 0 . 945
15 6 . 479 2 . 094 4 . 491 0 . 240 4 . 721 0 . 746 4 . 321 0 . 633 4 . 428 0 . 512 4 . 460 1 . 149
20 6 . 182 1 . 809 4 . 492 0 . 280 4 . 632 0 . 810 4 . 327 0 . 735 4 . 414 0 . 604 4 . 514 1 . 328
30 5 . 832 1 . 490 4 . 489 0 . 354 4 . 586 0 . 950 4 . 319 0 . 889 4 . 444 0 . 750 4 . 460 1 . 606
45 5 . 572 1 . 283 4 . 492 0 . 447 4 . 591 1 . 178 4 . 322 1 . 104 4 . 478 0 . 934 4 . 337 1 . 945
60 5 . 410 1 . 184 4 . 490 0 . 533 4 . 518 1 . 336 4 . 319 1 . 279 4 . 449 1 . 080 4 . 293 2 . 201
90 5 . 232 1 . 126 4 . 490 0 . 666 4 . 471 1 . 644 4 . 323 1 . 591 4 . 404 1 . 339 4 . 213 2 . 548
120 5 . 104 1 . 123 4 . 488 0 . 782 4 . 410 1 . 826 4 . 317 1 . 791 4 . 363 1 . 528 4 . 149 2 . 805
180 4 . 954 1 . 192 4 . 490 0 . 966 4 . 338 2 . 201 4 . 321 2 . 194 4 . 308 1 . 800 4 . 148 3 . 468
240 4 . 839 1 . 257 4 . 487 1 . 099 4 . 246 2 . 425 4 . 311 2 . 460 4 . 254 2 . 048 4 . 249 3 . 932
360 4 . 727 1 . 405 4 . 485 1 . 300 4 . 201 2 . 885 4 . 314 2 . 957 4 . 236 2 . 627 4 . 316 4 . 696
720 4 . 602 1 . 948 4 . 489 1 . 894 4 . 325 4 . 343 4 . 331 4 . 353 4 . 234 4 . 191 4 . 327 5 . 679
1440 4 . 478 2 . 613 4 . 478 2 . 613 4 . 327 5 . 679 4 . 327 5 . 679 4 . 327 5 . 679 4 . 327 5 . 679
Note: The table shows the results of a simulation experiment wher e 5000 days of 8,640,000 (log) prices (100 prices per second) are
simulated from a normal distribution with mean zero and vari ance 4.41 (21% standard deviation on an annual basis). All pr ices are
observed, but are converted to bid and ask prices (with equal probability) by either subtracting or adding half the sprea d s = 0. 005
(on a starting price of 1). For each day the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ),
the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t), the two time-scales estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t)
are computed for various sampling frequencies shown in colu mn 1. RR∆
S,t and RV ∆
S,t are obtained from (11) with q = 5000 (with RR
replaced by RV for the scaled realized variance).
31
Table 4: Realized range and realized variance with infreque nt trading and bid-ask bounce
Frequency RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
(minutes) Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Me an RMSE
1 8 . 243 3 . 836 4 . 472 0 . 097 8 . 913 4 . 515 4 . 263 0 . 213 4 . 415 0 . 205 4 . 419 0 . 401
2 7 . 073 2 . 667 4 . 473 0 . 110 6 . 664 2 . 280 4 . 264 0 . 265 4 . 416 0 . 219 4 . 402 0 . 475
3 6 . 562 2 . 158 4 . 472 0 . 127 5 . 917 1 . 553 4 . 263 0 . 310 4 . 414 0 . 250 4 . 410 0 . 541
4 6 . 258 1 . 856 4 . 472 0 . 140 5 . 529 1 . 190 4 . 258 0 . 349 4 . 412 0 . 279 4 . 414 0 . 605
5 6 . 056 1 . 657 4 . 473 0 . 156 5 . 311 1 . 001 4 . 264 0 . 381 4 . 411 0 . 306 4 . 417 0 . 667
10 5 . 553 1 . 172 4 . 471 0 . 216 4 . 853 0 . 717 4 . 255 0 . 519 4 . 414 0 . 420 4 . 436 0 . 923
15 5 . 344 0 . 984 4 . 474 0 . 267 4 . 723 0 . 742 4 . 266 0 . 626 4 . 420 0 . 518 4 . 463 1 . 112
20 5 . 212 0 . 877 4 . 471 0 . 310 4 . 636 0 . 793 4 . 255 0 . 715 4 . 425 0 . 598 4 . 454 1 . 302
30 5 . 066 0 . 784 4 . 474 0 . 385 4 . 597 0 . 944 4 . 274 0 . 872 4 . 432 0 . 735 4 . 457 1 . 606
45 4 . 950 0 . 749 4 . 474 0 . 474 4 . 537 1 . 129 4 . 262 1 . 064 4 . 442 0 . 915 4 . 445 1 . 957
60 4 . 881 0 . 765 4 . 476 0 . 556 4 . 518 1 . 306 4 . 266 1 . 238 4 . 445 1 . 069 4 . 435 2 . 225
90 4 . 794 0 . 824 4 . 471 0 . 683 4 . 486 1 . 607 4 . 259 1 . 532 4 . 448 1 . 332 4 . 393 2 . 760
120 4 . 755 0 . 904 4 . 478 0 . 790 4 . 464 1 . 828 4 . 274 1 . 756 4 . 437 1 . 561 4 . 417 3 . 138
180 4 . 686 1 . 077 4 . 481 0 . 999 4 . 429 2 . 279 4 . 276 2 . 205 4 . 420 1 . 955 4 . 506 3 . 787
240 4 . 657 1 . 214 4 . 484 1 . 147 4 . 434 2 . 604 4 . 296 2 . 526 4 . 416 2 . 309 4 . 518 4 . 240
360 4 . 609 1 . 483 4 . 490 1 . 434 4 . 460 3 . 223 4 . 296 3 . 107 4 . 477 2 . 942 4 . 453 5 . 087
720 4 . 574 2 . 075 4 . 498 2 . 035 4 . 436 4 . 510 4 . 318 4 . 391 4 . 456 4 . 524 4 . 340 6 . 189
1440 4 . 509 2 . 844 4 . 509 2 . 844 4 . 340 6 . 189 4 . 340 6 . 189 4 . 340 6 . 189 4 . 340 6 . 189
Note: The table shows the results of a simulation experiment wher e 5000 days of 8,640,000 (log) prices (100 prices per second) are
simulated from a normal distribution with mean zero and vari ance 4.41 (21% standard deviation on an annual basis). Subse quently
with probability π = 0. 001 we observe a price and with probability 1 − π we do not, while the observed prices converted to bid and
ask prices (with equal probability) by either subtracting o r adding half the spread s = 0 . 005 (on a starting price of 1). For each
day the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t),
the two time-scales estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t) are computed for various sampling
frequencies shown in column 1. RR∆
S,t and RV ∆
S,t are obtained from (11) with q = 5000 (with RR replaced by RV for the scaled
realized variance).
32
Table 5: Unconditional daily S&P500 volatility distributi ons
r2
t RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
Mean 1 . 792 1 . 533 1 . 750 1 . 818 1 . 824 1 . 784 1 . 673
StDev 3 . 263 1 . 408 1 . 678 1 . 879 1 . 967 1 . 840 1 . 942
Skewness 4 . 622 4 . 251 4 . 159 4 . 967 4 . 658 5 . 244 5 . 594
Kurtosis 36 . 14 32 . 10 29 . 99 41 . 32 35 . 71 45 . 34 49 . 87
Maximum 41 . 15 16 . 20 19 . 24 24 . 17 21 . 56 23 . 51 24 . 74
Minimum 0 . 00 0 . 122 0 . 118 0 . 108 0 . 081 0 . 110 0 . 073
Note: The table shows sample statistics of the daily squared retu rn, the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the
scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t obtained from (11) with q = 66), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), the scaled
realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t obtained from (11) with q = 66 and RR replaced by RV ), the two time-scales
estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t) for the S&P500 index-futures
from 4 January 1999 to 23 February 2004 (1289 trading days). T he sampling frequency is ﬁve minutes
from 9:30-16:15 EST and 15 minutes from 16:15-9:30 EST.
Table 6: Unconditional daily S&P500 return distributions
rt rt/
√
RR∆
t rt/
√
RR∆
S,t rt/
√
RV ∆
t rt/
√
RV ∆
S,t
Mean − 0. 0163 0 . 0185 0 . 0184 0 . 0199 0 . 0226
StDev 1 . 339 1 . 091 1 . 034 1 . 011 1 . 035
Skewness 0 . 0723 0 . 1384 0 . 1305 0 . 1408 0 . 1442
Kurtosis 4 . 310 2 . 814 2 . 800 2 . 748 2 . 756
Jarque-Bera 93 . 31 5 . 966 5 . 807 7 . 677 7 . 670
Maximum 5 . 737 3 . 500 3 . 175 3 . 043 3 . 077
Minimum − 6. 415 − 3. 121 − 3. 063 − 2. 739 − 2. 867
Note: The table shows sample statistics of the daily return, and t he daily return standardized with
the square root of the realized range ( RR∆
t ), the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t obtained from (11) with
q = 66), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ), or the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t obtained from (11) with
q = 66 and RR replaced by RV ) for the S&P500 index-futures from 4 January 1999 to 23 Febru ary
2004 (1289 observations). The sampling frequency is ﬁve min utes from 9:30-16:15 EST and 15 minutes
from 16:15-9:30 EST.
33
Table 7: Mean and standard deviation S&P500 realized range a nd variance
Day/night
Frequency RR∆
t RR∆
S,t RV ∆
t RV ∆
S,t RV ∆
T T S,t RV ∆
AC1,t
1/5 1.288 1.751 1.945 1.832 1.870 1.897
(1.183) (1.710) (1.911) (1.926) (1.773) (1.971)
5/15 1.533 1.750 1.818 1.824 1.784 1.673
(1.408) (1.678) (1.879) (1.967) (1.840) (1.942)
15/15 1.591 1.746 1.703 1.827 1.667 1.686
(1.518) (1.717) (1.868) (2.104) (1.744) (2.068)
27/45 1.662 1.745 1.707 1.825 1.566 1.710
(1.674) (1.796) (2.007) (2.275) (1.704) (2.032)
45/115 1.691 1.743 1.725 1.830 1.403 1.705
(1.743) (1.830) (2.208) (2.489) (1.611) (2.296)
405/1035 1.733 1.730 1.807 1.801 1.808 1.808
(2.079) (2.041) (3.210) (3.148) (3.213) (3.213)
Daily 1.731 1.792
(2.190) (3.263)
Note: Mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) for the reali zed range ( RR∆
t ), the scaled
realized range ( RR∆
S,t obtained from (11) with q = 66), the realized variance ( RV ∆
t obtained
from (11) with q = 66 and RR replaced by RV ), the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t), the
two time-scales estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t) and the ﬁrst-order kernel-based estimator ( RV ∆
AC1,t) for the
S&P500 index-futures for diﬀerent sampling frequencies. T he sample period runs from 4 January
1999 to 23 February 2004 (1289 observations). Sampling freq uencies are denoted by the length
of the sampling intervals in minutes from 9:30-16:15 EST (ﬁr st number) and 16:15-9:30 EST
(second number). For example, 1/5 implies the one-minute fr equency is used during the ‘day’
and the ﬁve-minute frequency during the ‘night’. Under ‘Dai ly’ Parkinson’s daily high-low range
is reported for realized range, and the daily squared return for the realized variance.
34
Table 8: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: rea lized range vs. realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
t yt = RR∆
t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 995 0 . 814 0 . 000 0.018-0.056 0 . 997 0 . 998 1 . 000 0.000-0.970
5/15 0 . 961 0 . 985 1 . 000 0.002-0.695 0 . 977 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.001-0.988
Close- 27/45 0 . 994 0 . 992 1 . 000 0.005-0.981 0 . 989 0 . 992 1 . 000 0.005-0.980
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 698 0 . 000 0 . 000 0.000-0.000 0 . 697 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 947 0 . 987 0 . 634 0.000-0.000 0 . 993 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.978
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.968 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.940
No 1/5 0 . 998 0 . 871 0 . 000 0.020-0.183 0 . 998 0 . 997 1 . 000 0.001-0.979
5/15 0 . 960 0 . 986 1 . 000 0.005-0.908 0 . 971 0 . 997 1 . 000 0.002-0.993
Open- 27/45 0 . 993 0 . 987 1 . 000 0.009-0.978 0 . 986 0 . 987 1 . 000 0.009-0.977
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 320 0 . 000 0 . 000 0.000-0.000 0 . 843 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 993 1 . 000 0 . 929 0.000-0.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the realized range ( RR∆
t ) and the
realized variance ( RV ∆
t ). The table reports p-values of the MDM test of equal predictive accuracy and
forecast encompassing. p-values below q (above 1 − q) indicate that the null hypothesis of equal R2 (MSE
or MAE) can be rejected in favor of the lagged realized varian ce (realized range) as a predictor having
a higher R2 (or smaller MSE or MAE) than the lagged realized range (reali zed variance) at the 100 q%
signiﬁcance level. For example, the ﬁrst number in the table (1-minute daytime frequency, 5-minute night
frequency; R2 criterion; realized variance the target), i.e. 0.991, indi cates that the lagged realized range has
a signiﬁcantly higher R2 than the lagged realized variance at the 0.9% (1 - 0.991) sign iﬁcance level. For the
encompassing regression test (ENC) there are two numbers. T he ﬁrst (second) reﬂects whether the lagged
realized variance (range) has a signiﬁcant contribution af ter the lagged realized range (variance) is already
included. Here a high p-value rejects the null that the second forecast has no incre mental information so
for both we look for high p-values to reject the null.
35
Table 9: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: sca led realized range vs. scaled realized
variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
S,t yt = RR∆
S,t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 972 0 . 968 0 . 975 0.011-0.886 0 . 993 0 . 984 1 . 000 0.006-0.945
5/15 0 . 948 0 . 993 1 . 000 0.002-0.883 0 . 989 0 . 998 1 . 000 0.001-0.978
Close- 27/45 0 . 987 0 . 986 1 . 000 0.010-0.971 0 . 986 0 . 988 1 . 000 0.009-0.977
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 194 0 . 789 0 . 417 0.000-0.012 0 . 849 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.280
5/15 0 . 666 0 . 992 0 . 875 0.000-0.010 0 . 999 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.328
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.860 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.983
No 1/5 0 . 968 0 . 971 0 . 999 0.011-0.907 0 . 994 0 . 994 1 . 000 0.003-0.982
5/15 0 . 913 0 . 987 1 . 000 0.006-0.919 0 . 960 0 . 996 1 . 000 0.003-0.986
Open- 27/45 0 . 980 0 . 993 1 . 000 0.004-0.978 0 . 986 0 . 995 1 . 000 0.003-0.987
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 001 0 . 436 0 . 178 0.000-0.000 0 . 662 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 731 1 . 000 0 . 988 0.000-0.052 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.998 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t) and
the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t) obtained from (11) with q = 66. See Table 8 for further details.
Table 10: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: sc aled realized range vs. two time-
scales estimator
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
T T S,t yt = RR∆
S,t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 993 0 . 933 0 . 363 0.022-0.794 0 . 998 0 . 971 1 . 000 0.010-0.907
5/15 0 . 991 0 . 973 0 . 995 0.014-0.935 0 . 996 0 . 978 1 . 000 0.011-0.947
Close- 27/45 0 . 965 0 . 688 0 . 820 0.035-0.250 0 . 943 0 . 778 0 . 993 0.013-0.305
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 520 0 . 237 0 . 005 0.000-0.000 0 . 985 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.228
5/15 0 . 927 0 . 819 0 . 651 0.000-0.002 1 . 000 0 . 998 1 . 000 0.000-0.119
27/45 1 . 000 0 . 016 0 . 052 0.000-0.000 1 . 000 0 . 990 1 . 000 0.000-0.000
No 1/5 0 . 983 0 . 839 0 . 305 0.117-0.763 0 . 991 0 . 892 1 . 000 0.080-0.845
5/15 0 . 990 0 . 963 0 . 992 0.025-0.937 0 . 997 0 . 972 1 . 000 0.020-0.953
Open- 27/45 0 . 982 0 . 733 0 . 833 0.039-0.309 0 . 970 0 . 862 1 . 000 0.012-0.428
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 841 0 . 666 0 . 079 0.000-0.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.914
5/15 0 . 944 0 . 959 0 . 943 0.000-0.016 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.786
27/45 1 . 000 0 . 201 0 . 535 0.000-0.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.000
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t)
obtained from (11) with q = 66 and the two time-scales estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t). See Table 8 for further
details.
36
Table 11: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: ro lling forecasts from realized range
vs. realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
t yt = RR∆
t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 997 0 . 763 0 . 918 0.011-0.015 0 . 997 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.000-0.993
5/15 0 . 961 0 . 772 1 . 000 0.000-0.027 0 . 988 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.902
Close- 27/45 0 . 996 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.000-0.979 0 . 989 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.000-0.979
to-
close Yes 1/5 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0.004-0.000
5/15 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 988 0.000-0.009
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 998 0.000-0.985 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.997
No 1/5 0 . 981 0 . 982 0 . 997 0.004-0.600 0 . 986 0 . 132 0 . 383 0.035-0.008
5/15 0 . 874 0 . 944 0 . 959 0.009-0.347 0 . 938 0 . 789 0 . 953 0.007-0.006
Open- 27/45 0 . 992 0 . 978 0 . 933 0.003-0.364 0 . 992 0 . 976 0 . 979 0.004-0.401
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 999 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0.437-0.000
5/15 0 . 995 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.999 1 . 000 0 . 998 0 . 951 0.000-0.000
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 955 0.000-0.731 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 995 0.000-0.891
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the bias adjusted rolling forecasts
obtained from the realized range ( RR∆
t ) and the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ). See Table 8 for further details.
Table 12: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: ro lling forecasts from scaled realized
range vs. scaled realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
S,t yt = RR∆
S,t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 991 0 . 961 0 . 994 0.001-0.102 0 . 998 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.000-0.903
5/15 0 . 900 0 . 689 0 . 997 0.012-0.066 0 . 990 0 . 991 1 . 000 0.000-0.484
Close- 27/45 0 . 985 0 . 976 1 . 000 0.004-0.810 0 . 987 0 . 992 1 . 000 0.002-0.937
to-
close Yes 1/5 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
27/45 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
No 1/5 0 . 947 0 . 976 0 . 999 0.007-0.828 0 . 975 0 . 974 1 . 000 0.005-0.611
5/15 0 . 928 0 . 966 0 . 994 0.010-0.805 0 . 967 0 . 973 0 . 999 0.006-0.620
Open- 27/45 0 . 973 0 . 975 0 . 977 0.007-0.850 0 . 992 0 . 983 0 . 997 0.004-0.763
to-
close Yes 1/5 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 994 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.999
27/45 0 . 996 1 . 000 0 . 998 0.000-0.999 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.998
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the bias adjusted rolling forecasts
obtained from the scaled realized range RR∆
S,t and the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t) obtained from (11)
with q = 66. See Table 8 for further details.
37
Table 13: Forecasting S&P 500 index-futures volatility: ro lling forecasts from scaled realized
range vs. two time-scales estimator
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
T T S,t yt = RR∆
S,t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1/5 0 . 968 0 . 339 0 . 753 0.007-0.000 0 . 999 0 . 986 1 . 000 0.000-0.043
5/15 0 . 993 0 . 914 0 . 999 0.000-0.003 1 . 000 0 . 999 1 . 000 0.000-0.039
Close- 27/45 0 . 997 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.957 0 . 992 0 . 987 1 . 000 0.000-0.518
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 996 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 999 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
27/45 0 . 998 1 . 000 0 . 849 0.000-0.009 0 . 999 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
No 1/5 0 . 963 0 . 967 0 . 996 0.004-0.305 0 . 988 0 . 994 1 . 000 0.001-0.872
5/15 0 . 892 0 . 952 0 . 968 0.009-0.355 0 . 962 0 . 984 0 . 998 0.005-0.772
Open- 27/45 0 . 971 0 . 876 0 . 821 0.006-0.055 0 . 956 0 . 982 0 . 983 0.004-0.733
to-
close Yes 1/5 0 . 990 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000 1 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-1.000
5/15 0 . 989 1 . 000 0 . 999 0.000-0.986 0 . 999 1 . 000 1 . 000 0.000-0.999
27/45 0 . 996 0 . 958 0 . 414 0.000-0.000 0 . 997 1 . 000 0 . 999 0.000-0.997
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the bias adjusted rolling forecasts
obtained from the scaled realized range RR∆
S,t obtained from (11) with q = 66 and the two time-scales
estimator ( RV ∆
T T S,t). See Table 8 for further details.
Table 14: S&P 100 stocks: unconditional daily volatility di stributions (realized range)
RRt RRS,t
Mean StDev Skew. Kurt. Mean StDev Skew. Kurt.
Min 1 . 254 1 . 438 2 . 164 9 . 508 1 . 368 1 . 395 2 . 122 10 . 24
0.10 2 . 192 2 . 039 2 . 989 16 . 71 2 . 175 2 . 064 3 . 185 19 . 38
0.25 2 . 589 2 . 593 3 . 471 23 . 23 2 . 750 2 . 660 3 . 772 25 . 93
0.50 3 . 553 3 . 611 4 . 415 38 . 75 3 . 430 3 . 765 4 . 598 41 . 07
0.75 5 . 037 6 . 393 7 . 400 93 . 66 5 . 483 7 . 097 7 . 355 94 . 04
0.90 9 . 770 11 . 56 12 . 58 242 . 4 8 . 888 10 . 85 12 . 16 244 . 18
Max. 20 . 66 54 . 61 36 . 23 1454 17 . 76 56 . 82 36 . 02 1423 . 8
Mean 4 . 798 6 . 372 6 . 711 120 . 1 4 . 625 6 . 429 6 . 768 116 . 22
StDev 3 . 637 7 . 960 6 . 226 243 . 8 3 . 210 8 . 061 5 . 994 231 . 99
Note: The table summarizes the distributions of the daily volati lities of the 100 S&P100 index
constituents. The realized range ( RRt) is calculated based on ﬁve-minute intervals and the close-
to-open squared return. The scaled realized range ( RRS,t) is obtained using (11) with q = 66.
38
Table 15: Forecasting S&P 100 stock volatility: realized ra nge vs. realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
t yt = RR∆
t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1 61 − 5 44 − 1 90 − 0 48 − 26 54 − 10 5 − 66 0 − 92 29 − 89
5 50 − 3 4 − 33 8 − 55 28 − 73 46 − 6 0 − 71 0 − 98 23 − 96
Close- 30 8 − 13 0 − 60 0 − 99 24 − 99 5 − 20 0 − 68 0 − 100 21 − 100
to-
close Yes 1 74 − 6 82 − 3 94 − 1 5 − 1 38 − 26 0 − 97 0 − 100 0 − 90
5 35 − 15 30 − 43 37 − 30 3 − 15 9 − 42 0 − 98 0 − 100 0 − 93
30 0 − 94 0 − 99 1 − 99 0 − 88 0 − 99 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 98
No 1 37 − 6 50 − 0 90 − 0 34 − 10 2 − 38 2 − 78 0 − 93 18 − 91
5 2 − 51 4 − 47 9 − 63 17 − 58 1 − 75 0 − 83 0 − 100 11 − 97
Open- 30 0 − 79 0 − 82 0 − 98 12 − 100 0 − 90 0 − 86 0 − 99 8 − 100
to-
close Yes 1 47 − 7 90 − 1 97 − 1 5 − 0 2 − 82 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 91
5 1 − 56 36 − 37 37 − 33 0 − 9 0 − 97 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 95
30 0 − 99 0 − 98 1 − 97 0 − 86 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 99
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the realized range ( RRt) and the
realized variance ( RVt). The entries show the number of times realized variance win s and the number
of times realized range wins (out of a possible 100, signiﬁca nt diﬀerences based on Diebold-Mariano
statistic at the 5% signiﬁcance level). For example, the ent ry 61-5 (left uppercorner) indicates that with
the realized variance (at 1-minute frequency) as the target , the lagged realized variance as a predictor
has a signiﬁcantly larger (smaller) R2 than the lagged realized range for 61 (5) stocks. See Table 8 f or
further details.
39
Table 16: Forecasting S&P 100 stock volatility: scaled real ized range vs. scaled realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RV ∆
S,t yt = RR∆
S,t
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1 38 − 5 20 − 10 10 − 60 60 − 60 35 − 5 38 − 7 50 − 31 75 − 47
5 24 − 6 25 − 8 5 − 58 65 − 43 25 − 6 40 − 3 41 − 31 79 − 33
Close- 30 5 − 19 24 − 6 11 − 31 68 − 38 5 − 25 33 − 3 13 − 34 75 − 29
to-
close Yes 1 17 − 23 0 − 94 0 − 97 0 − 73 16 − 28 44 − 46 41 − 49 17 − 28
5 1 − 62 0 − 99 0 − 100 0 − 63 3 − 61 26 − 56 20 − 63 3 − 19
30 0 − 93 0 − 99 0 − 99 0 − 19 0 − 96 3 − 86 0 − 91 0 − 9
No 1 9 − 36 1 − 75 0 − 97 6 − 86 4 − 45 29 − 40 35 − 52 29 − 48
5 1 − 73 0 − 82 0 − 98 8 − 89 2 − 81 19 − 49 17 − 69 20 − 46
Open- 30 0 − 82 0 − 74 0 − 94 10 − 84 0 − 89 3 − 60 0 − 92 10 − 64
to-
close Yes 1 5 − 63 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 96 5 − 63 38 − 55 34 − 56 16 − 44
5 0 − 92 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 96 0 − 93 20 − 67 18 − 77 2 − 42
30 0 − 98 0 − 100 0 − 100 0 − 62 0 − 99 1 − 95 0 − 98 0 − 40
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the scaled realized range ( RR∆
S,t) and
the scaled realized variance ( RV ∆
S,t) obtained from (11) with q = 66. See Tables 8 and 15 for further details.
Table 17: Forecasting S&P 100 stock volatility: rolling for ecasts from realized range vs.
realized variance
Outlier Freq yt = RVt yt = RRt
Var corr. (min) R2 MSE MAE ENC R2 MSE MAE ENC
No 1 14 − 12 9 − 16 11 − 29 54 − 65 11 − 15 9 − 16 10 − 50 58 − 70
5 7 − 25 2 − 22 0 − 58 43 − 83 5 − 25 3 − 21 3 − 66 43 − 81
Close- 30 3 − 25 0 − 34 0 − 59 35 − 86 3 − 36 1 − 44 2 − 69 32 − 84
to-
close Yes 1 2 − 67 0 − 98 0 − 93 0 − 98 0 − 75 36 − 56 42 − 44 27 − 48
5 0 − 89 0 − 99 0 − 93 0 − 97 0 − 92 21 − 63 31 − 49 12 − 47
30 0 − 92 0 − 99 2 − 72 0 − 94 0 − 95 0 − 87 8 − 62 0 − 67
No 1 3 − 37 9 − 20 13 − 35 43 − 59 2 − 50 5 − 28 6 − 65 28 − 76
5 0 − 59 0 − 48 0 − 82 12 − 83 1 − 67 0 − 69 0 − 88 11 − 89
Open- 30 0 − 63 0 − 69 0 − 90 10 − 95 0 − 77 0 − 81 0 − 95 9 − 96
to-
close Yes 1 3 − 59 0 − 99 0 − 98 0 − 99 2 − 73 37 − 53 40 − 51 34 − 48
5 0 − 81 0 − 100 0 − 98 0 − 100 0 − 90 25 − 63 28 − 55 15 − 53
30 0 − 94 0 − 100 0 − 75 0 − 95 0 − 99 1 − 88 7 − 72 0 − 71
Note: The table summarizes the relative forecasting performanc e of the bias adjusted rolling forecasts
obtained from the realized range ( RR∆
t ) and the realized variance ( RV ∆
t ). See Tables 8 and 15 for further
details.
40
Figure 1: RMSE of the scaled realized range RR∆
S,t obtained from (11) as a function
of q, for sampling frequencies as listed in the ﬁrst column of Tab le 2. The sampling
frequency increases from the top line to the bottom.
41