Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
Available online 21 June 2023
1386-4181/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Markets
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finmar
The lead–lag relation between VIX futures and SPX futures✩
Christine Bangsgaard a, Thomas Kokholma,b,∗
a Aarhus BSS, Aarhus University, Department of Economics and Business Economics, Denmark
b Danish Finance Institute, Denmark
A R T I C L E I N F O
JEL classification:
G11
G12
G13
G14
G23
Keywords:
Lead–lag relation
High-frequency data
Cross-correlation
Price discovery
VIX futures hedging
Cross-market activity
A B S T R A C T
We analyze the lead–lag relation between VIX futures and SPX futures. The two futures markets
are weakly connected when market volatility is low. By contrast, when volatility is high, their
prices are highly negatively correlated, with VIX futures leading SPX futures. However, the
tightness of the lead–lag relation prevents the formation of profitable trading strategies in a
setup that includes transaction costs. An analysis of the time variation in the lead–lag relation
finds that an improvement in the relative liquidity of one market strengthens the lead of that
market. Moreover, the hedging activities of market makers influence the lead–lag relation.
1. Introduction
In a market without frictions, the prices of different financial instruments should move contemporaneously, and past price
changes should not carry information relevant for predicting future price changes. However, in practice, all available information
is not properly reflected in all prices at all times, and the price change of a given financial instrument might contain information
about another instrument’s future price movements. The lead–lag relation between two instruments quantifies the ability of the
leading instrument to predict future price changes in the lagging instrument. As such, the identification of lead–lag patterns has
useful implications for understanding the price discovery process, as well as practical value for both speculation and hedging.
We study the lead–lag relation between VIX futures and E-mini SPX futures (referred to as SPX futures hereafter) on a sample of
transactions time-stamped down to the millisecond and collected from January 2013 to September 2020. We quantify the lead–lag
relation based on the cross-correlation function from which two different measures are extracted; the lead–lag ratio ( 𝐿𝐿𝑅) based
on the whole cross-correlation function ( Huth and Abergel , 2014), and the lead–lag time ( 𝐿𝐿𝑇 ) defined as the point where the
absolute value of the cross-correlation function is maximized ( Hoffmann et al., 2013). We find that the two futures markets exhibit
little connection under low levels of volatility, while their prices are characterized by a stronger negative correlation under high
volatility. Moreover, when market volatility is high, the 𝐿𝐿𝑅 measure signals that the VIX futures lead the SPX futures. Hence, the
nature of the lead–lag relation is highly dependent on the volatility regime. While the two lead–lag measures concur on the direction
✩ This research was conducted with support from the Independent Research Fund Denmark (Grant: DFF 0133-00151B). We thank Bart Frijns, Anders Merrild
Posselt, Sang Seo, Carsten Tanggaard, Rasmus Tangsgaard Varneskov, and two anonymous reviewers for their useful comments. The paper has been presented
at the SIAM Conference on Financial Mathematics 2021, the Derivative Markets Conference 2021, and the 2021 FMA Conference on Derivatives and Volatility.
∗ Corresponding author at: Aarhus BSS, Aarhus University, Department of Economics and Business Economics, Denmark.
E-mail addresses: chba@econ.au.dk (C. Bangsgaard), thko@econ.au.dk (T. Kokholm).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.finmar.2023.100851
Received 12 May 2022; Received in revised form 6 June 2023; Accepted 6 June 2023
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
2
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
of the lead in the majority of the sample, the COVID-19 period is characterized by some misalignment of the two measures. For this
period,𝐿𝐿𝑅 points to a clear VIX futures lead, while 𝐿𝐿𝑇 indicates a tight SPX futures lead. By contrast, on pre-COVID-19 days of
high volatility, the 𝐿𝐿𝑇 measure points to a tight VIX futures lead.
Once a lead–lag relation between two securities is identified, it can be relevant to study if a trading strategy exploiting the
relation can be formed. We consider two simple strategies where the futures in one market is traded following a change in the
futures price in the other market. The strategies generate positive average returns when we assume that trades can be executed at
midquotes. However, if we more realistically assume that trades are executed at prevailing bid and ask prices, the profit is eaten up
by transaction costs. Taken together with the finding that the lead–lag relation is tight, we conclude that the two markets are too
synchronized for the relation to be systematically monetized by investors.
Although no lead–lag profit appears to be present under the more realistic assumption of the trading strategy, the results illustrate
the close connection between the two futures markets. It suggests that price movements of both markets are informative about the
future price movements in the other market. In particular, conditioned on the VIX index being at a high level, the VIX futures price
changes provide a stronger signal (in the form of higher average returns) about future SPX futures price movements relative to the
full sample. By contrast, the SPX futures price changes provide the strongest signal about VIX futures changes during the COVID-19
pandemic. The finding is in line with our conclusion drawn from the analysis on the lead–lag relation. Even if the documented
lead–lag relation cannot be traded with a profit, quantifying a lead–lag relation still has relevance for trading purposes, such as the
optimal execution of trades or for market makers setting bid–ask quotes.
Traditionally, changes to the price of a given equity index and its volatility are considered to be connected via two channels
(Bekaert and Wu, 2000; Bollerslev et al., 2006). First, if volatility is priced, an increase in the level of volatility impacts the price of
the index negatively as investors require a lower price to be compensated for the higher level of risk. This channel is traditionally
labeled the volatility feedback effect. Second, a drop in the value of the index leads to higher volatility due to the so-called leverage
effect. Hence, speculation in the level of volatility of the SPX index or the price of the SPX index can be performed both with VIX
futures and SPX futures, respectively. This implies that the relative liquidity of the two markets potentially plays a role in which
market first reflects new information. Consistent with a price discovery channel, we find that an increase in the liquidity of VIX
futures relative to the liquidity of SPX futures results in a strengthening of the VIX futures lead and vice versa.
Moreover, we compute a measure of cross-market activity between the VIX futures and SPX futures, using the methodology
introduced in Dobrev and Schaumburg (2018), and find that higher levels of cross-market trading are linked with a stronger VIX
futures lead. Overall, we interpret cross-market activity as a combined measure of the activity of two types of agents. The first type
consists of high-frequency traders executing orders in one futures market as a reaction to price changes in the other market. Hence,
in high volatility scenarios where VIX futures tend to lead SPX futures, and the markets are more tightly connected, high-frequency
traders can exploit this link and trade in SPX futures as a reaction to changes in the VIX futures price. As these high-frequency
traders will trade in the same direction as the anticipated price change in SPX futures, they have the potential to increase the
magnitude of the cross-correlations. With an existing VIX futures lead, this will be reflected in a stronger VIX futures lead and vice
versa. The second type of agents consists of VIX futures dealers setting up their hedge in response to a change in their VIX futures
net position. In order to hedge their positions in volatility, dealers can employ various options-based hedging strategies, or they can
set up a more approximate hedge utilizing the strong negative correlation between VIX futures and SPX futures (Bangsgaard and
Kokholm, 2023). Since these strategies entail trading the underlying in the form of the SPX futures, VIX futures trading would lead
to subsequent hedging activities in the SPX futures. These transactions would influence the lead–lag relation in the direction of a
VIX futures leadership.
In addition, we consider how the aggregate net gamma position of SPX option dealers can impact the lead–lag relation. If new
information is first incorporated into the VIX futures market, the SPX futures market will subsequently adjust to reflect the new
information by moving in the opposite direction of the VIX futures price. The SPX futures price change typically induces option
dealers with a negative gamma position to rebalance their hedge positions by trading in the same direction as the price change (Ni
et al., 2021). A negative aggregate gamma position of dealers could therefore result in an even stronger VIX futures leadership as
the initial VIX futures price movement continues to have an impact on the SPX futures over a longer time frame. In line with this
reasoning, and conditioned on the gamma position being negative, we find that a change in the gamma imbalance towards a more
negative position is associated with a strengthening of the VIX futures lead.
Our findings of VIX futures and SPX futures prices not being entirely synchronized may appear at odds with what we would
expect for two large and liquid markets. However, other studies show that even for markets that are considered large and actively
traded, one market can lead the price changes of another market (Chen et al., 2016; Dao et al., 2018). Furthermore, the evidence on
the leadership of the VIX futures may be somewhat surprising in light of the larger SPX futures market. Nevertheless, our findings are
consistent with other research showing that VIX futures play a dominant role in relation to other SPX-related markets. In particular,
several studies show that the VIX futures lead the VIX index (Shu and Zhang, 2012; Frijns et al., 2016; Bollen et al., 2017; Chen and
Tsai, 2017). By construction of the VIX index, this translates into VIX futures leading SPX options. Park (2020) shows that relative
to SPX options, the VIX futures and option prices contain different information about future expected variance and play a greater
role in variance discovery. In addition to leading SPX options, Bollen et al. (2017) show that VIX futures lead VIX options.
The VIX futures and SPX futures markets are natural candidates to assess the lead–lag relation between volatility markets and
equity markets. Among the different traded volatility products, the market for VIX futures is the biggest exchange-traded venue for
volatility and allows for ’’pure’’ volatility speculation without having to delta-hedge, as opposed to volatility speculation via options.
Moreover, and as mentioned above, other studies find that VIX futures lead other volatility-sensitive products, such as SPX options
and VIX options. The VIX futures market is also more liquid than VIX options (Hilal et al., 2011). Since the VIX futures price contains
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
3
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
information on the expected future volatility of the SPX index, we should use a traded equity product closely connected to the SPX
index. Hasbrouck (2003) shows that across the E-mini SPX futures, the floor-traded SPX futures, and ETFs tracking the SPX index,
the E-mini SPX futures contribute the most to price discovery. Using more recent data, Buckle et al. (2018) show that the largest
contribution to price discovery comes from ETFs tracking the SPX index, not from the SPX futures. Similarly, Chen et al. (2016)
find that more price discovery occurs in SPY than in SPX futures but with the roles reversed during periods of high volatility. In
particular, we are interested in the lead–lag relation in high volatility scenarios as this is where we find that the VIX futures and SPX
futures prices are more tightly linked. Moreover, we connect the lead–lag relation to the hedging activities of dealers. In comparison
to index funds, futures are more natural to use as hedging instruments, partly because of their unfunded nature and partly because
of possible short-selling restrictions on ETFs. Hence, we favor relying on the SPX futures.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. First, we devote Section 2 to give an overview of related literature. Next, we
introduce the methodology to quantify the lead–lag relation in Section 3. Section 4 presents the data and the results of the empirical
analysis. Finally, we conclude in Section 5.
2. Related literature
A large number of studies on lead–lag relations among the SPX and its derivatives already exist. The findings of Frijns et al.
(2016) reveal that VIX futures have some predictive power for the SPX index, while Hasbrouck (2003) shows that SPX futures lead
the SPX index. These findings leave it unclear as to what extent VIX futures lead or lag SPX futures. As mentioned above, there is
also evidence that VIX futures lead the VIX index, which is equivalent to leading SPX options. Moreover, Chen et al. (2016) show
that SPX futures contribute more to price discovery than SPX options. Thus, both VIX futures and SPX futures lead SPX options,
but again the VIX futures and SPX futures lead–lag relation cannot be inferred from these studies. While Lee et al. (2017) show
that the VIX futures basis (the difference between VIX futures and the VIX index) has some predictive power for the SPX futures
returns, the information contained in the VIX futures price and VIX futures basis may be distinct. We, therefore, contribute to the
literature by providing the first evidence on the lead–lag relation between the VIX futures and the SPX futures market. Contrary
to Lee et al. (2017), who use daily data, we analyze the lead–lag relation from high-frequency data, which allows for examining its
time variation.
The paper is also related to the literature on the relation between lagged equity market returns and volatility. Carr and Wu (2006)
study the cross-correlation function for SPX index returns and VIX index changes at a daily frequency and find marginal evidence
of SPX returns having some predictive power for VIX index changes. Similarly, Bollerslev et al. (2006) find a significant negative
correlation between the absolute value of SPX returns (volatility proxy) and lagged SPX returns, both sampled at a five-minute
frequency. At the same time, correlations between returns and lagged absolute returns are close to zero. The same pattern is found
by Bollerslev et al. (2012) using the squared VIX index as the volatility measure. Dufour et al. (2012) use the same data frequency
but for the floor-traded SPX futures and estimate the volatility by computing three measures of volatility: the two backward-looking
measures, realized volatility and bipower variation, and a forward-looking measure based on implied volatilities. Results based on
the backward-looking volatility measures show that the volatility feedback effect is almost absent, while it becomes more important
for the forward-looking measure. We use a forward-looking measure in the form of VIX futures prices and find, using data at the
millisecond frequency and a maximum lag of up to one minute, that the volatility feedback effect appears to be more important
than the leverage effect. Though the correlation between lagged SPX futures returns and contemporaneous VIX futures returns is
non-zero for the smaller lags, the cross-correlation function’s decay towards zero is even slower for the part showing the relation
between lagged VIX futures returns and contemporaneous SPX futures returns.
Time-varying cross-market correlations have been documented for a number of other markets. Bollen et al. (2017) analyze
how lead–lag relations among volatility instruments and volatility indices evolve over time. Buccheri et al. (2021) show that
lead–lag relations across stocks heavily depend on the level of volatility. Previous studies also indicate that the contemporaneous
correlation of equity and bond markets is mostly positive but tends to be negative when the VIX is high or increases (Connolly
et al., 2005; Underwood, 2009). Part of the negative stock-bond correlation in times of high volatility has been attributed to the
shift of investments from stock to bond markets (flight-to-quality) as investors attempt to reduce risk exposure (Fleming et al.,
1998; Connolly et al., 2005; Underwood, 2009). Along the same lines, the stronger negative correlation between VIX futures and
SPX futures under high volatility regimes could be driven by investors moving funds between the SPX futures and the VIX futures
market. Similar to the way that bonds are considered safe-haven assets under stock market turmoil, volatility-sensitive derivatives
such as VIX futures provide an alternative asset class to manage risks and gain additional diversification at times of heightened
volatility. In fact, it appears to be during high volatility periods that the two futures markets exhibit the strongest correlation.
Hence, diversification benefits seem to be present, especially during periods of high volatility.
Several papers document market frictions across the different SPX derivatives markets. Park (2020) finds that measures of
expected future variance from SPX options and VIX derivatives differ during the financial crisis and connects part of the deviations
to funding and market illiquidity. Van Tassel (2020) documents static arbitrage opportunities between VIX futures and SPX options
as VIX futures violate their lower and upper bounds implied by SPX options. Barras and Malkhozov (2016) find deviations in the
variance risk premium (VRP) derived from equity prices and SPX option prices, respectively, and attribute the divergence to the
financial standing of option intermediaries. Furthermore, the equity-based VRP provides a better projection of future economic
outlook compared to the option-based VRP.
Cheng (2019) shows that the VIX premium, defined as the difference between a VIX futures price and the physical expectation of
the VIX, decreases and, in some cases, turns negative during periods of market turmoil. In a follow-up study, Cheng (2020) documents
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
4
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 1. Illustration of the timestamp adjustment for the cross-correlation functions.
that during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, the increase in the physical expectation of future VIX values exceeded the
increase in VIX futures prices with the implication that the VIX premium became negative and remained in the negative domain for
an extended period. Lochstoer and Muir (2022) and Yang (2022) propose alternative models that can explain the dynamics of the
VIX premium. Both Cheng (2019) and Cheng (2020) attribute the falling VIX premium when the stock market crashes to changes
in hedging demand by VIX futures dealers. Our paper is related, as we find that the cross-market activity measure is a strong driver
of the lead–lag relation, as well as the increased negative correlation between the VIX futures and the SPX futures markets when
market volatility is high.
3. Lead–lag methodology
Many studies on lead–lag relations are concerned with financial instruments that are closely linked by no-arbitrage relations
such that a cointegrating relation of the prices can be assumed. In those settings, the information share (Hasbrouck, 1995) or the
common factor component weight approach (Gonzalo and Granger, 1995) are often applied. However, it is inappropriate to impose
the assumption of cointegration when describing the relation between VIX futures and SPX futures prices. Instead, we analyze the
lead–lag relation through the cross-correlation function. In Section 3.1, we describe how to obtain the cross-correlation function using
the techniques of Hayashi and Yoshida (2005) and Hoffmann et al. (2013). In Section 3.2, we present three different quantifications
of the lead–lag relation based on the cross-correlation function.
3.1. Estimation of the cross-correlation function
Based on Hayashi and Yoshida (2005) and Hoffmann et al. (2013), we estimate the cross-correlation for two instruments, 𝐴 and
𝐵, as:
̂ 𝜌𝐻𝑌 (𝜗) =
∑𝑛𝐴
𝑖=1
∑𝑛𝐵
𝑗=1𝛥𝑡𝐴
𝑖
𝑋𝐴𝛥𝑡𝐵
𝑗
𝑋𝐵1{
(𝑡𝐴
𝑖−1,𝑡𝐴
𝑖 ]∩(𝑡𝐵
𝑗−1−𝜗,𝑡𝐵
𝑗 −𝜗]≠∅
}
√
∑𝑛𝐴
𝑖=1
(
𝛥𝑡𝐴
𝑖
𝑋𝐴
)2
√
∑𝑛𝐵
𝑗=1
(
𝛥𝑡𝐵
𝑗
𝑋𝐵
)2
, (1)
where𝛥𝑡𝑘
𝑖
𝑋𝑘 =𝑋𝑘
𝑡𝑘
𝑖
−𝑋𝑘
𝑡𝑘
𝑖−1
is the log-return of instrument 𝑘 with𝑘 =𝐴,𝐵 ,𝑖 = 1, …,𝑛𝑘, and 𝑛𝑘 is the number of trades of instrument
𝑘 on the given day. Hence, the returns entering in Eq. (1) are computed between every single tick, 𝑡𝑘
𝑖 . The product of two returns
is included in the sum whenever the time intervals, over which the returns are realized, overlap. Inspired by Dao et al. (2018), we
illustrate this in Fig. 1. By focusing on the first two line segments, we ignore the possibility of shifting the timestamps so 𝜗 = 0 .
For instance, consider the three intervals of instrument 𝐵, 𝐽1, 𝐽2, and 𝐽3. 𝐽1 intersects with 𝐼2, 𝐽2 intersects with 𝐼2, while 𝐽3
intersects with 𝐼2,𝐼3, and 𝐼4. Thus, the contribution to the sum based on each of the three intervals is 𝛥𝑡𝐴
2
𝑋𝐴𝛥𝑡𝐵
1
𝑋𝐵,𝛥𝑡𝐴
2
𝑋𝐴𝛥𝑡𝐵
2
𝑋𝐵,
and (𝛥𝑡𝐴
2
𝑋𝐴 +𝛥𝑡𝐴
3
𝑋𝐴 +𝛥𝑡𝐴
4
𝑋𝐴)𝛥𝑡𝐵
3
𝑋𝐵, respectively. Hence, it is possible that the same return can contribute to the sum more than once
as it will enter every time the interval intersects with one of the intervals of the other instrument. Note that when implementing
Eq. (1), the return over 𝐼1 will not influence the correlation as the indicator function equals zero for intervals that do not intersect
with any of the intervals of the other instrument.
Repeatedly adjusting the timestamps of the second instrument by different values of𝜗 allows us to compute the cross-correlation
function. The shift of the timestamps is illustrated for instrument𝐵 in the lower part of Fig. 1. Note that only the timestamps of one
of the two instruments are shifted while the timestamps of the other remain fixed. The returns, 𝛥𝑡𝑘
𝑖
𝑋𝑘, are invariant to the shift of
the timestamps, meaning that only the indicator function changes as we vary the value of 𝜗. Thus, it is the same returns that enter
Eq. (1) for each 𝜗, but they are multiplied and summed in different ways.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
5
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 2. Illustration of cross-correlation functions.
3.2. Lead–lag time, lead–lag correlation, and lead–lag ratio
To measure the lead–lag relation between two instruments, Hoffmann et al. (2013) define the lead–lag time as the value of 𝜗
that maximizes the absolute value of the cross-correlation function,|̂ 𝜌𝐻𝑌 (𝜗)|, across all𝜗 on some grid. If the absolute correlation is
maximized at a point𝜗 ≠ 0, then one instrument is leading the other. Under certain assumptions, the point is a consistent estimator of
the true𝐿𝐿𝑇 (Hoffmann et al., 2013). While𝐿𝐿𝑇 measures the amount of time by which an instrument leads the other, knowledge
of the value of the cross-correlation function at the point corresponding to 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is also informative about the nature of the lead–lag
relation. The value of the cross-correlation at this point is referred to as the lead–lag correlation ( 𝐿𝐿𝐶).
Both𝐿𝐿𝑇 and𝐿𝐿𝐶 focus on a single point of the cross-correlation function. However, the rest of the cross-correlation function
also contains relevant information about the direction and strength of the lead–lag relation. The lead–lag ratio of Huth and Abergel
(2014) accounts exactly for this by compressing the entire cross-correlation function into a single measure of the lead–lag relation.
Considering all the positive timestamp adjustments, 𝜗1, …,𝜗𝑝, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is defined as
𝐿𝐿𝑅 =
∑𝑝
𝑖=1 ̂ 𝜌2
𝐻𝑌
(𝜗𝑖
)
∑𝑝
𝑗=1 ̂ 𝜌2
𝐻𝑌
(−𝜗𝑗
). (2)
The ratio captures the relative forecasting ability of one instrument over the other. When 𝐿𝐿𝑅> 1, it means that the correlations at
positive lags are overall larger than the correlations at negative lags. Thus, the instrument for which the timestamps are kept fixed
will lead the instrument for which the timestamps are adjusted (instrument𝐴 will lead instrument𝐵 in Fig. 1). The conclusion of the
leadership is the opposite if𝐿𝐿𝑅< 1, where the instrument with fixed timestamps lags the other (instrument𝐵 leads instrument𝐴).
Compared to𝐿𝐿𝑇 , the𝐿𝐿𝑅 measure takes into account the overall predictive power of the returns of one instrument on the returns
of the other instrument by summing the squared correlations. The conclusion on the lead–lag relation drawn from 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is generally
more sensitive to the shape of the cross-correlation function, as small variations in its shape could shift 𝐿𝐿𝑇 from a positive to
a negative value and vice versa. 𝐿𝐿𝑇 may also have a limited ability to capture differences in the strength of the leadership that
may exist even when two 𝐿𝐿𝑇 s are close to each other. For instance, consider the two cases illustrated in Fig. 2, where 𝐿𝐿𝑇 and
𝐿𝐿𝐶 are identical, but the behavior of the cross-correlation function to the right of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is very different. In the plot to the left,
the cross-correlation function goes to zero very quickly, while in the plot to the right, the cross-correlation slowly decays to zero
for values of 𝜗 higher than 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . Hence, the lead–lag relation depicted in the plot to the left is much stronger than the one to the
right. Still, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 and 𝐿𝐿𝐶 will be identical, and only 𝐿𝐿𝑅 will capture this difference in the strength of the lead–lag relation. In
fact,𝐿𝐿𝑅 could lead to a different conclusion on the lead–lag relation than 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . We compute both measures as they complement
each other well. The 𝐿𝐿𝑅 measure is a more robust measure of the lead–lag relation since it uses the entire cross-correlation curve
as input, but it does not tell us anything about the length of the lead–lag relation. By contrast, since 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is a time measurement,
it is a natural candidate for assessing the tightness of the lead–lag relation.
3.3. Statistical significance of the lead–lag relation
In order to assess the statistical significance of the lead–lag relation, we construct confidence intervals of the lead–lag measures
𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . Since there are no readily available solutions for computing these, we follow Bollen et al. (2017) and construct
confidence intervals specific to each sample date by applying a simple block bootstrap. With this approach, the data are resampled
in blocks. Analyzing dependencies across time is the objective of a lead–lag analysis, and resampling in blocks helps to preserve
dependence structures in the data. The choice of block size involves a trade-off. Smaller blocks would result in some dependencies
being lost, while longer blocks reduce the variation among the resampled blocks resulting in a less smooth empirical distribution
of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . Here we split the regular trading hours into 27 non-overlapping intervals of 15 min. For each day, we resample
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
6
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
with replacement from these 27 intervals and junction them in the order they were resampled. The result is a series of trades that
together make up 6 h and 45 min of trading, mimicking the length of the regular trading session. The HY estimator is then applied
to the series. This procedure is repeated 2,000 times to get a set of lead–lag measures that form the empirical distribution of the
given measure. If the value of the lead–lag measure under the null ( 𝐿𝐿𝑅 = 1 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 = 0 ) is located sufficiently far out in the
tails of the empirical distribution, we conclude that one market is leading the other. The direction of the leadership is determined
by which tail of the empirical distribution the value under the null belongs to.
4. Empirical analysis
In this section, we present the empirical analysis. First, in Section 4.1, we describe the data. Next, Section 4.2 presents the results
on the overall lead–lag relation between VIX futures and SPX futures. In Section 4.3, we repeat the analysis to trades outside the
regular trading hours. In Section 4.4, we propose two simple trading strategies and study their ability to monetize the lead–lag
relation. Finally, we analyze potential drivers of the lead–lag relation in Section 4.5.
4.1. Data
Tick-by-tick trade and quote data on SPX futures (ES) and VIX futures (VX) are obtained from Tick Data and cover the period
from January 2013 to September 2020. The timestamps of the trades are available with millisecond precision. For each sample date,
the VIX futures contract used for the analysis is the one closest to an expiry of 30 days, and the SPX futures contract used is the
one closest to expiry except when the time to expiry is less than six days, in which case we shift to the next contract. For the main
analysis, we focus on trades during the regular trading hours of VIX futures, 9:30-16:15 EST. Any date where the exchanges closed
earlier is removed from the sample. Trades with a negative price are removed. For the quotes, we keep only those with a positive
bid and ask price and bid–ask spread. For the purpose of computing the cross-correlation function of Section 3, trades sharing the
same timestamp are replaced by a single trade with a price equal to the median price of the trades.
Fig. 3 depicts the annual trading volume and number of trades for the chosen SPX futures and VIX futures across the sample.
The trading volume in SPX futures is relatively steady throughout the sample in comparison to the volume in VIX futures, where the
volume increases up to 2018, followed by a decline for the last two years of the sample. However, despite the decrease in volume
on VIX futures towards the end of the sample, we see that the number of trades in VIX futures stays at a high level after 2018,
pointing to the observation that the decrease in volume stems from a decrease in average trade size. For the SPX futures market,
2017 stands out as there are a low number of trades and a relatively low trading volume. Note that 2017 was characterized by a
very low level of SPX volatility, which generally slows down the speed of trading.
Time series of the VIX index and VIX futures closing prices are collected from the Cboe homepage. Daily data on the open interest
and prices of SPX options, as well as the SPX index are provided by OptionMetrics. Days of scheduled release of information on the
U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), Employment Situation, or Gross Domestic Product (GDP) are obtained
from Archival Federal Reserve Economic Data (ALFRED). We also collect the dates of scheduled FOMC announcements from the
Federal Reserve Board.
4.2. The lead–lag relation
In this subsection, we present the overall results on the lead–lag relation based on the methodology detailed in Section 3. For
the computation of cross-correlations, we keep the timestamp of the SPX futures trades fixed and shift the timestamps of the VIX
futures trades. To estimate the cross-correlation function, the grid of 𝜗 is chosen so that it is finer around zero and less dense as we
move away from zero. We do this to capture variations in the correlation at higher detail around zero since we expect the lead–lag
time to be in this range. Hence, the grid is chosen as
−60, −59.9, …, −1.1, −1, −0.99, …, −0.11, −0.1, −0.099, …, −0.001, 0, 0.001, …, 0.099, 0.1, 0.11, …, 0.99, 1, 1.1, …, 59.9, 60,
where the numbers are in seconds and the largest value ( ±60 seconds) reflects the maximum allowed lead–lag. When the grid is
most narrow, the length between two grid points is one millisecond, which corresponds to the precision at which the trades are
measured.
Fig. 4 depicts the median of the cross-correlation across the sample. From Panel (a), we see that the peak of the function is
around a lag of zero, and the cross-correlation function is close to zero for lags greater than approximately 20 s in absolute value.
Zooming in on the timeshifts up to one second in Panel (b), we observe a skewed shape of the cross-correlation function with more
weight on the left part of the curve. The asymmetry translates into an 𝐿𝐿𝑅 measure that is less than one. Hence, on average, 𝐿𝐿𝑅
indicates that the VIX futures lead the SPX futures.
Fig. 5 shows the time series of the three lead–lag measures presented in Section 3.2, together with the time series of the VIX
index and the SPX index. The shaded areas of the chart represent the days with a VIX level belonging to the 60% upper quantile
corresponding to values above 15.35. Inspection of the upper panel of Fig. 5 confirms what Fig. 4 indicates, namely that on most
days, the VIX futures lead the SPX futures (𝐿𝐿𝑅< 1). We also notice some interesting features of the lead–lag measures on days of
high volatility. First, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 seems to be more stable and around a level of approximately 0.8. Second, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is erratic when volatility
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
7
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 3. Trading activity in SPX futures and VIX futures. Yearly average of daily trading volume (Panel (a)) and number of trades (Panel (b)). Numbers are in
thousands. For each sample date, the VIX futures contract used is the one with an expiry closest to 30 days. The SPX futures contract is the one closest to
expiration, except when this is less than six days. The variables are measured over regular trading hours.
Fig. 4. Median cross-correlation function over the sample period. If the absolute cross-correlation is maximized at a positive (negative) lag, it means that the
SPX futures (VIX futures) lead.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
8
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 5. The lead–lag measures and the VIX and the SPX over the sample period. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60%
upper quantile.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
9
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 6. Stylized cross-correlation functions in states with low volatility and high volatility.
is low while displaying a tight lead–lag with values close to zero in high volatility regimes. Third,𝐿𝐿𝐶 gets more pronounced when
volatility is high.
In order to understand the very erratic nature of the 𝐿𝐿𝑇 measure, Fig. 6 depicts stylized cross-correlation curves in a state
with a low and high level of market volatility, respectively. The figure illustrates that when volatility is low, the overall level of
the cross-correlation curve is close to zero, and the position of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 suffers from instability. There is a risk that the markets are not
close enough connected during low volatility regimes for 𝐿𝐿𝑇 to properly reflect the time it takes before the lagging return series
has incorporated the same information as the leading series. This means that under low volatility, one should be careful to read too
much meaning into 𝐿𝐿𝑇 and 𝐿𝐿𝑅 about the direction of the lead–lag relation. On the other hand, when the volatility is high, the
curve gets more peaked, with 𝐿𝐿𝑇 positioned close to zero. For this reason, it is more reasonable to rely on the values of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 and
𝐿𝐿𝑅 as describing the lead–lag relation in high volatility regimes.
Panel A of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on the three lead–lag measures. In addition to using the full sample, we also
split the sample into the period before and the period after the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis using February 20, 2020 as the
cut-off date. Based on the observations connected to Fig. 5, we compute the statistics conditioned on the volatility being in the
upper quartile while excluding the period after the COVID-19 outbreak, which is characterized by a high level of VIX. Panel A
confirms our observations of the relation between 𝐿𝐿𝐶 and volatility. In the two subsamples where the VIX index is at elevated
levels, the VIX belonging to the upper quartile excluding the COVID-19 period and the COVID-19 period itself, 𝐿𝐿𝐶 is negative for
all days, and generally, its values are larger in magnitude. In terms of the mean and median values, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is relatively stable across
all three samples, and the values below one indicate that VIX futures lead SPX futures. However, the variability in 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is much
lower, conditioned on the volatility being high. Considering 𝐿𝐿𝑇 , the picture is more extreme. On the full sample, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 roughly
varies in the interval [−60 s, 60 s]. In comparison, for the high volatility sample, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is much more concentrated around zero with
a minimum value of −2.900 s and a maximum value equal to 0.660 s. In this subsample, the distribution of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is not only more
narrow around zero but also has more weight on the negative values with a mean and median of −0.022 and −0.003, respectively.
Since a negative value of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 indicates a VIX futures leadership, the high volatility subsample is characterized by a VIX futures
lead both in terms of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . With respect to 𝐿𝐿𝑇 , the COVID-19 period differs from the sample conditioned on a high
volatility level, where the measure based on the former sample is, on average, slightly positive while slightly negative in the latter.
In addition, Panel B shows the proportion of the sample dates where 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and𝐿𝐿𝑇 indicate either a VIX futures or SPX futures
leadership. We observe that on most sample dates, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is below one, meaning that VIX futures lead. Especially, we notice that
the proportion of days where VIX futures lead in terms of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is equal to or close to 100% for the two subsamples characterized
by high volatility. For the same two subsamples, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 behaves quite differently. While 57% of the days in the VIX upper quartile
subsample reveal a VIX futures lead, this is only 17% during the COVID-19 period. Hence, in that period, there appears to be more
disagreement between 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 on whether VIX futures lead or lag SPX futures. The construction of the lead–lag measures
can explain part of the misalignment. As the location of the maximum of the absolute cross-correlation is more sensitive compared
to the 𝐿𝐿𝑅 measure, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is a more stable measure of the direction of the lead–lag relation.
Panel C of Table 1 reports the results from the bootstrap method detailed in Section 3.3. At a significance level of 5%, 𝐿𝐿𝑅
shows that the VIX futures is leading on the vast majority of days in the two subsamples characterized by high volatility, while𝐿𝐿𝑅
is almost never significantly greater than 1, indicating that SPX futures essentially never leads. By contrast, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 reveals a less clear
picture of the direction of the lead–lag relation. On the pre-COVID-19 high-VIX subsample, the measure points to a significant VIX
futures lead on 27% of the days, compared to a SPX futures lead on 11% of the days. Hence, in this subsample, the two lead–lag
measures are aligned, although 𝐿𝐿𝑅 shows a more stable VIX futures leadership. If we focus on the COVID-19 period, the 𝐿𝐿𝑇
measure leads to a different conclusion than 𝐿𝐿𝑅. Here 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is significantly greater than zero on 51% of the days, pointing to an
SPX futures lead. However, the number of days where we detect a significant SPX futures lead according to 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is far below the
number of days where 𝐿𝐿𝑅 shows a significant VIX futures leadership.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
10
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table 1
Descriptive statistics of the lead–lag measures.
Full sample VIX upper quartile
(pre-COVID-19)
COVID-19 period
Panel A: Descriptive statistics
𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶 𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶 𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶
Mean 0.840 −0.532 −0.089 0.785 −0.022 −0.139 0.823 0.008 −0.278
Std. dev. 0.205 10.265 0.083 0.121 0.212 0.062 0.076 0.054 0.099
Min 0.266 −59.700 −0.501 0.480 −2.900 −0.339 0.567 −0.590 −0.501
Lower quartile 0.715 −0.263 −0.112 0.704 −0.020 −0.176 0.781 0.005 −0.342
Median 0.805 −0.010 −0.062 0.762 −0.003 −0.126 0.830 0.016 −0.281
Upper quartile 0.918 0.018 −0.035 0.852 0.009 −0.092 0.878 0.026 −0.200
Max 2.274 58.700 0.029 1.471 0.660 −0.023 0.974 0.038 −0.052
Panel B: Proportion above/below thresholds
𝐿𝐿𝑅< 1 (VX lead) 84.8% 94.4% 100.0%
𝐿𝐿𝑇 <0 (VX lead) 59.1% 56.9% 17.4%
𝐿𝐿𝑇 <0 & 𝐿𝐿𝑅< 1 (VX lead) 55.8% 56.0% 17.4%
𝐿𝐿𝑇 >0 & 𝐿𝐿𝑅> 1 (ES lead) 11.8% 4.7% 0%
𝐿𝐿𝑇 >0&𝐿𝐿𝑅< 1
(disagreement)
28.0% 35.2% 82.6%
Panel C: Statistical significance
𝑞𝐿𝐿𝑅
0.95 < 1 (VX lead) 48.5% 78.8% 92.9%
𝑞𝐿𝐿𝑇
0.95 < 0 (VX lead) 12.7% 26.6% 7.7%
𝑞𝐿𝐿𝑅
0.05 > 1 (ES lead) 1.4% 1.1% 0%
𝑞𝐿𝐿𝑇
0.05 > 0 (ES lead) 7.5% 10.6% 51.0%
Panel A shows summary statistics of the lead–lag measures. Panel B shows the proportion of days where the lead–lag measures
are above or below the thresholds given by the values of the measures under the null. Panel C contains measures of the statistical
significance of the lead–lag relation obtained by the bootstrap procedure. It shows the proportion of days where the 5th (95th)
percentile of the empirical distribution is above (below) the values of the lead–lag measures under the null. All numbers are
shown for the full sample, a subsample of high VIX days excluding the COVID-19 pandemic, and a subsample containing all days
after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic (sample days after February 20, 2020). The pre-COVID-19 high VIX subsample
first excludes all days after the COVID-19 cutoff date and then includes only the days where the level of the VIX index is above
its upper quartile. 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is measured in seconds.
Overall, we conclude that the behavior of the lead–lag measures strongly depends on the volatility regime. In periods of high
volatility, 𝐿𝐿𝐶 is characterized by larger negative values and the lead–lag relation is short-lived, as indicated by 𝐿𝐿𝑇 , but with
a tendency for VIX futures to lead both when measured in terms of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . A similar dependence on volatility is found
in Buccheri et al. (2021), where the lead–lag correlation among stocks strengthens when volatilities are high while being more
erratic in low volatility regimes. Other studies find that the correlation between the VIX index and the SPX index increases when
market movements are large (Todorov and Tauchen, 2011; Cont and Kokholm, 2013).
4.3. Overnight lead–lag relation
The results presented so far are based on data sampled during regular trading hours from 9:30 to 16:15 EST. During the period
of our sample, the trading hours of VIX futures expanded on several occasions, and trading is now possible around important
events or news arriving outside the regular trading hours of the market. The release of macroeconomics news in the U.S. is an
important example of this. Over the sample period, there are also events with a potentially large market impact taking place
overnight, such as the U.K.-wide referendum to withdraw from the European Union in 2016. Hence, it is important to understand the
functioning of financial markets during after-hours. For individual stocks, Barclay and Hendershott (2003) find that price discovery
does occur during after-hours but that this part of the day is characterized by less efficient prices and price discovery relative
to the regular trading session. Distinguishing between pre-open and post-close, they find that this is even less for post-close. Other
studies point towards significant overnight uncertainty resolution. Hu et al. (2022) show that overnight SPX futures returns are large
before U.S. macro announcements and their model predicts such return patterns based on the resolution of uncertainty prior to the
announcement. The findings of Bondarenko and Muravyev (2023) also reveal how price discovery takes place during after-hours.
They document that a specific four-hour period outside the regular hours of SPX futures is associated with positive futures return.
The pattern is connected to reductions in uncertainty as information is processed at the opening of the European financial markets.
Throughout the sample period, SPX futures trade almost 24 h a day. On the other hand, the trading hours of VIX futures have
been extended multiple times during the same period, as reported in Table 2. Since the change to VIX futures trading hours in June
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
11
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table 2
Evolution of VIX futures trading hours (EST).
Date of change Pre-open Regular hours Post-close
– 9:30–16:15 –
December 10, 2010 8:20–9:30 9:30–16:15 –
September 26, 2011 8:00–9:30 9:30–16:15 –
October 28, 2013 8:00–9:30 9:30–16:15 16:30–17:15
November 4, 2013 3:00–9:30 9:30–16:15 16:30–17:15
June 22, 2014 18:00–9:30 9:30–16:15 16:30–17:00
Fig. 7. Share of trading volume during extended trading hours in VIX futures and SPX futures. Six months moving average of trading volume relative to the
total volume across all available trading hours. Regular trading hours span from 9:30-16:15 EST, and overnight trading is any trading outside this interval.
2014, it has been possible to trade both VIX futures and SPX futures at almost all times of the day. Fig. 7 shows the evolution
in after-hours daily trading volume relative to the total daily volume over regular and after-hours. The extension of VIX futures
trading to almost 24 h a day in mid-2014 could explain some of the increase we observe in the second half of 2014. Until this
change, after-hours trading made up less than 7% of the total trading. Over our sample period, this has increased to approximately
15%. For the SPX futures, the averaged series of overnight volume fraction is mostly within the range of 15% to 20%.
These observations raise the question of whether the relation between SPX and VIX futures during extended trading hours is
similar to the one prevailing during regular trading hours. To explore this, we compute the lead–lag measure using only trading
during after-hours. For most of the sample period (since June 22, 2014), VIX futures and SPX futures have the same extended
trading hours. Due to the 15 minutes of no trading after 16:15 and again at the end of the post-close session, we define after-hours
as beginning with the start of the pre-open trading session. For instance, since June 2014, after-hours start at 18:00 on day 𝑡 − 1
and end at 9:30 on day 𝑡. This interval creates a sequence of trading with no interruptions.
Fig. A.1 in the Appendix reveals that the lead–lag measures are more erratic during the first part of the sample, where extended
hours span over fewer hours. Ignoring the high-VIX days that fall within this part of the sample, the overnight relation between the
lead–lag measures and the level of the VIX is qualitatively the same as for the regular trading hours. Namely, for high levels of the
VIX, there is a stronger negative correlation, a value of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 very close to zero, and 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is fairly stable at a level below one.
Table A.1 shows descriptive statistics of the overnight lead–lag measures. All measures exhibit a greater variation around their
mean levels compared to the results for regular hours shown in Table 1 . As might be expected from the less frequent trading,
𝐿𝐿𝑇 takes on more extreme values even in the highly volatile environment of the pandemic. The statistics for the other high-
VIX subsample should be interpreted with caution, as the subsample includes days where the measures display erratic behavior.
Therefore, we focus on the median in the following discussion. For this subsample, 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 still agree on the leadership of
the VIX futures, while the COVID-19 period again provides mixed results with a𝐿𝐿𝑅 below one and a positive𝐿𝐿𝑇 . In comparison
to the sample comprised of the regular trading hours, 𝐿𝐿𝐶 is stronger in magnitude and takes on larger negative values during
the high volatility subsamples. We ascribe this observation to the lower trading frequency in the after-hours sample ( Epps, 1979;
Bonanno et al., 2001).
4.4. Trading strategies based on the lead–lag relation
We consider two separate trading strategies that involve trading exclusively in either VIX futures or SPX futures based on observed
price changes of the other futures contract. The first strategy is based on a VIX futures leadership and uses movements in the VIX
futures trade price as a signal of future SPX futures price changes. Based on the negative correlation, price increases in VIX futures
are expected to signal a decrease in the SPX futures and vice versa. Observing an increase (decrease) in the traded price of the VIX
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
12
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 8. Average return of the trading strategy in SPX futures for each sample date. The strategy takes long (short) SPX futures position after each decrease
(increase) in the VIX futures trading price. Trading is assumed to take place at bid or ask prices (solid line) and midquotes (dashed line) the millisecond following
the VIX futures price change. The holding period varies across the plots at values of five milliseconds, one second, one minute, and five minutes. The shaded
areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60% upper quantile.
futures for a given millisecond, a short (long) SPX futures position is entered at the following millisecond. The position is closed
after a specified amount of time. A new SPX futures position is opened every time the VIX futures price moves. This means that
multiple SPX futures positions may be open at a given point in time and may offset each other in case the VIX futures price bounces
back and forth during the holding period. Trades that do not move the VIX futures price will not induce any further trading.
The second strategy mirrors the first strategy, except that it is based on the SPX futures being the leader. Hence, a positive return
in the traded SPX futures price acts as a signal to sell VIX futures and vice versa.
When evaluating the trading strategies, we consider the case where all trades can be executed at midquotes, and a more realistic
setting where all trades are executed at the prevailing bid and ask. We only consider the outcome of the trading strategy when
implemented during regular trading hours, and we let the holding period of each position in the futures contract vary from five
milliseconds to five minutes.
For each day, Fig. 8 depicts the average return across all positions held during that day for the strategy that trades SPX futures
based on the observed VIX futures price changes. Each plot shows the results for different holding periods. The returns associated
with the trading at midquotes assumption are shown by the dashed line, and we note that the strategy generates a positive average
daily return on most days. We also note that for the very short horizon, although being small, the average daily returns stay above
zero for the majority of the dates. When the holding period is increased, the variability increases with the consequence that the
strategy yields negative average returns on more days. The solid line in Fig. 8 depicts the performance of the same strategy based on
the assumption that transactions are executed at the prevailing bid and ask prices. Overall, this strategy generates negative returns
irrespective of the holding period. Due to the tightness of the lead–lag relation, the position in the SPX futures is held for very short
horizons and the cost from trading at the bid and ask prices outweighs the SPX futures price change signaled by the realized VIX
futures return.
Next, in the left plot in Fig. 9, we depict the average return per transaction across the full sample, along with two subsamples as
a function of the holding period of the SPX futures contract. The plot shows the results based on the midquote execution assumption.
In general, the returns of the strategy are higher in the sample conditioned on the pre-COVID-19 period, with the VIX index being
in the upper quartile. This connects well with the finding that the connection between the two futures prices is stronger when the
VIX index is at elevated levels. The returns for the COVID-19 period, where the VIX is also at a high level, are less pronounced,
although still above the returns based on the full sample for holding periods greater than 100 ms. Possibly, this has to do with the
finding of Section 4.2 that the VIX futures lead is not as evident during the COVID-19 period.
The outcome of the strategy, where the VIX futures is traded as a reaction to price changes in the SPX futures, is shown in
Fig. A.2 in the Appendix . The results are similar to those of Fig. 8 in the sense that price changes in SPX futures predict changes
to the VIX futures price, as illustrated by the many days with a positive average return. However, when trading at the bid or the
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
13
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 9. Average return of the trading strategy as a function of the holding period. The average is taken across sample days for all returns realized for a given
holding period, which ranges from one millisecond to five minutes. The plot to the left is based on a strategy that takes long (short) SPX futures position after
each decrease (increase) in the VIX futures trading price. The plot to the right is based on a similar strategy but trades VIX futures after each SPX futures price
change. All trades are assumed to take place at midquotes. The average return is shown for the full sample, a subsample of high VIX days excluding the COVID-19
pandemic, and a subsample containing all days after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic (sample days after February 20, 2020). The pre-COVID-19 high VIX
subsample first excludes all days after the COVID-19 cutoff date and then includes only the days where the level of the VIX index is above its upper quartile.
ask, this strategy also results in negative average returns across the entire sample period. More interestingly, we see from the plot
to the right in Fig. 9 that the average performance of the strategy is best when it is restricted to the COVID-19 period, while the
difference is negligible for the curves based on the full sample and the sample conditioned on the VIX being in its upper quartile.
Both observations fit well with the findings that in the pre-COVID-19 period, the VIX futures leads the SPX futures in high volatility
states while the COVID-19 period is characterized by a more ambiguous lead–lag relation (VIX futures lead SPX futures according
to 𝐿𝐿𝑅 while 𝐿𝐿𝑇 indicates the opposite).
4.5. Determinants of the lead–lag relation
We next analyze the potential drivers of the lead–lag relation by running a set of regressions with each of the three measures
of the lead–lag relation, 𝐿𝐿𝑅, 𝐿𝐿𝑇 , and 𝐿𝐿𝐶, as the dependent variable. In Section 4.5.1 , we analyze the impact of the relative
liquidity across the two markets, while in Sections 4.5.2 and 4.5.3, we consider the influence of dealers’ hedging activities in relation
to VIX futures hedging and SPX option rebalancing, respectively. In each subsection, the main explanatory variables are described
in further detail.
Since Fig. 5 and Table 1 of Section 4.2 indicate that the behavior of the lead–lag measures differ strongly across volatility
regimes, we perform the regressions only for the subsample of days where the VIX index is above its 60% percentile. Hence, we
leave out the parts of the sample where the measures are erratic and indicate a weak link between the two markets. Along with
our main explanatory variables described below, we also include a set of control variables. In order to control more broadly for
market conditions, we include the level of the VIX index, 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡, and the SPX index return, 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡. Other lead–lag studies show that
the level of volatility and SPX returns could influence the lead–lag relation. Chen et al. ( 2016) show a dependence on volatility
as the relative informativeness of SPX futures and SPY is reversed under high volatility, while Ren et al. ( 2019) suggest that the
lead–lag relation between equity index options and the index is reversed when the index is not stable or up-trending. We also
control for the time to expiry of the specific VIX futures and SPX futures contracts used to compute the lead–lag measures. These
are denoted by 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡 and𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 , respectively. Moreover, we include a macroeconomic news announcement dummy, 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 ,
equal to one for the days of the announcements since other studies show that lead–lag relations might differ on those days. For
instance, Frino et al. ( 2000) show that the leadership of equity index futures relative to the equity index is strengthened around
the time of macroeconomic announcements, while Chen and Tsai (2017) find that VIX futures lead the VIX index more on the days
of the release. Analyzing high-frequency price dynamics, Andersen et al. ( 2007) find that the SPX futures returns can be extreme
around U.S. macroeconomic news. The announcement days we use to construct the dummy variable are the days of the scheduled
release of information on the CPI, PPI, Employment Situation, or GDP. These announcements are grouped into a single dummy
variable, and all occur outside regular trading hours. On the other hand, the FOMC statements are released within regular trading
hours. To account for this difference, we include a dummy variable that exclusively contains the FOMC announcement dates, 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡 .
The results of the regression for𝐿𝐿𝑅,𝐿𝐿𝑇 , and𝐿𝐿𝐶 are shown in Tables 3, 4, and 5, respectively. The regression for𝐿𝐿𝐶 only
uses one of our three main explanatory variables since only this variable potentially influences the strength of the correlation at the
peak of the cross-correlation curve. Compared to the other regressions, the results for𝐿𝐿𝑇 in Table 4 are less appealing to interpret.
A quick glance at Fig. 5 reveals that 𝐿𝐿𝑇 fluctuates wildly around zero during low volatility periods. When volatility is high, 𝐿𝐿𝑇
is close to zero but still fluctuates around zero, as indicated in Table 1. This can explain why the R-squared is close to zero across all
the 𝐿𝐿𝑇 regressions. Hence, the results support our statements in Section 3.2 . Namely, that 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is highly unstable, and 𝐿𝐿𝑅 is a
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
14
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table 3
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝑅.
𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑡 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
−0.132 −0.222∗∗
(−1.59) ( −2.10)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
−0.029 −0.075
(−0.63) ( −1.35)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
−0.296∗∗∗ −0.403∗∗∗
(−4.33) ( −5.45)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡
0.053 0.063
(0.89) (1.03)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡
0.194∗∗∗ 0.199∗∗∗
(4.20) (4.15)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
0.104∗ −0.078 0.161 ∗∗∗ −0.017
(1.72) ( −1.34) (3.74) ( −0.38)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
0.000 −0.009 −0.007 −0.049
(0.00) ( −0.27) ( −0.22) ( −1.39)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
−0.001 0.000 −0.001 −0.003
(−0.04) (0.01) ( −0.05) ( −0.09)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.069∗∗ −0.070∗∗ −0.047 −0.071∗∗
(−2.10) ( −2.11) ( −1.60) ( −2.31)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
−0.148∗∗∗ −0.156∗∗∗ −0.181∗∗∗ −0.143∗∗∗
(−3.26) ( −3.21) ( −4.14) ( −3.12)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
0.018 0.002 −0.058 0.011
(0.33) (0.05) ( −1.12) (0.20)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 1.61 3.89 −0.05 2.21 8.61 13.06 4.80 6.70
No. of Obs. 773 773 773 773 773 773 773 773
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 on a set of explanatory variables for the subsample of days
where the VIX index is above its 60% percentile. The explanatory variables are the relative liquidity of VIX futures and to SPX
futures measured using the Amihud measure, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , and relative trading volume, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 , the peak cross-market trading
between VIX futures and SPX futures, 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡, and the aggregate SPX option net gamma position of dealers for days where
it is positive, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 , and for days where it is negative, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 . 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is the return
of the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡 are dummy variables equal to one on days with U.S. macroeconomic news and
FOMC announcements, respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡 (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the number of days to expiry of the VIX futures (SPX futures)
contract. All variables have been standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West
𝑡-statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
more robust measure of the lead–lag relation. For this reason, we proceed with the analysis of how our main explanatory variables
relate to the lead–lag relation relying mostly on 𝐿𝐿𝑅.1
4.5.1. Relative liquidity
Although the VIX futures and SPX futures prices are not linked by a no-arbitrage relation, the two futures contracts can still
be used to achieve similar objectives. Since both the VIX futures and SPX futures prices are expected to adjust in response to the
arrival of new market-wide information, investors can trade in either futures contracts to express their views on the new fair values.
Similarly, both contracts can be used to obtain protection against downside risk. A short SPX futures position provides a hedge
against stock market crashes, and given the negative correlation between the VIX futures and SPX futures prices, so does a long VIX
futures position (Szado, 2009; Hilal et al., 2011). Hence, the relative liquidity potentially plays a role for which market investors
prefer to trade in and can therefore influence which market first reflects new information. Traditionally, price discovery tends to
occur in the market with the highest liquidity. This is supported theoretically (Kyle, 1985) as well as empirically (Green et al., 2010;
Huth and Abergel, 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Frijns et al., 2018).
To test the role of liquidity, we define the relative liquidity of the two markets as the Amihud illiquidity measure (Amihud,
2002) computed for the SPX futures market relative to the same measure computed for the VIX futures market, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 =
𝐴𝑀𝐻𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ∕𝐴𝑀𝐻𝑉𝑋
𝑡 . For each of the two markets, the Amihud measure equals:
𝐴𝑀𝐻𝑡 = 1
𝑁
𝑁∑
𝑖=1
||𝑟𝑖,𝑡||
𝑉𝑜𝑙 $
𝑖,𝑡
, (3)
1 For the sake of completeness, we have included the regressions based on the full sample of observations in Tables A.2, A.3, and A.4 in the Appendix. The
results are qualitatively the same as those reported for the subsample in Tables 3, 4, and 5. The main difference is in the level of the R-squared. When the days
of low volatility are included in the sample, the explanatory power drops.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
15
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table 4
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 .
𝐿𝐿𝑇𝑡 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
0.038 0.025
(1.41) (0.68)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
−0.044 −0.027∗
(−1.61) ( −1.84)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
0.085 0.073
(1.53) (1.33)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡
−0.081∗∗ −0.082∗∗
(−2.53) ( −2.23)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡
−0.003 −0.005
(−0.15) ( −0.21)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
0.034∗∗∗ 0.045∗ 0.013∗ 0.034∗
(2.79) (1.66) (1.81) (1.75)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
0.001 −0.005 0.002 0.010
(0.05) ( −0.50) (0.20) (0.61)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
−0.076 −0.075 −0.076 −0.077
(−1.04) ( −1.03) ( −1.04) ( −1.06)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
0.022∗ 0.022∗ 0.018 0.022 ∗
(1.70) (1.67) (1.63) (1.70)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
−0.009 −0.015 −0.003 −0.006
(−0.66) ( −1.12) ( −0.17) ( −0.39)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
−0.068 −0.061 −0.056 −0.073
(−1.09) ( −1.06) ( −1.07) ( −1.17)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 0.01 0.38 0.07 0.41 0.59 0.72 0.41 0.88
No. of Obs. 773 773 773 773 773 773 773 773
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 on a set of explanatory variables for the subsample of days
where the VIX index is above its 60% percentile. The explanatory variables are the relative liquidity of VIX futures and SPX
futures measured using the Amihud measure, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , and relative trading volume, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 , the peak cross-market trading
between VIX futures and SPX futures, 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡, and the aggregate SPX option net gamma position of dealers for days where
it is positive, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 , and for days where it is negative, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 . 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is the return
of the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡 are dummy variables equal to one on days with U.S. macroeconomic news and
FOMC announcements, respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡 (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the number of days to expiry of the VIX futures (SPX futures)
contract. All variables have been standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West
𝑡-statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
with 𝑁 being the number of 5-minute intervals during the trading day, and 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑉𝑜𝑙 $
𝑖,𝑡 denote the return and dollar volume,
respectively, over the 𝑖th interval on day 𝑡. Fig. 10 shows the relative liquidity variable, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , across the sample period. Since
the Amihud measure is inversely related to the level of liquidity, we expect that an increase (decrease) in 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 leads to a
stronger (weaker) VIX futures lead.
We also consider a simpler measure of daily relative liquidity, defined as the fraction between the daily trading volume in the
VIX futures markets relative to the daily volume in the SPX futures market, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 = 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑉𝑋
𝑡 ∕𝑉𝑜𝑙𝐸𝑆
𝑡 . Fig. A.3 in the Appendix
depicts the resulting time series. The interpretation of this measure is similar to that of 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , with an increase suggesting
improvements in the relative VIX futures liquidity.
The results from the relative Amihud measure in columns (1)–(2) of Table 3 is mixed. Both coefficients are negative but only the
specification in column (2) is significant at the 5% level. This provides some indication that when the relative liquidity improves
in favor of the VIX futures market, the VIX futures lead is strengthened and vice versa. However, there is little support for this
conclusion from the volume ratio as its coefficient in columns (3)–(4) is not statistically significant.
Inspection of Figs. 10 and A.3 in the Appendix reveals that 𝐴𝑀𝐻𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ≪ 𝐴𝑀𝐻𝑉𝑋
𝑡 and 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑉𝑋
𝑡 ≪ 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝐸𝑆
𝑡 on all sample days.
Hence, it could potentially make a difference which market’s measure we normalize with when we define the 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑡 measures. As
a robustness check, we perform the regression against the inverse of the two liquidity ratio measures. Tables A.5 and A.6 in the
Appendix report the results. Still focusing on 𝐿𝐿𝑅, we see that for both the high-VIX subsample and the full sample, the results for
the inverse Amihud ratio are stronger with a significance at the 1% level. The coefficient on the inverse of the volume ratio is also
more significant. The results point in the same direction as before and indicate that when the relative liquidity is improved in favor
of the VIX futures, the lead of the VIX futures is strengthened.
The regression results suggest that variations in relative liquidity could play a role in price discovery, but it is also clear from the
level of the relative liquidity in Figs. 10 and A.3 that the VIX futures are always less liquid. In a related study, Park (2020) shows that
VIX futures and options together have dominated SPX options in variance discovery even in the period before the financial crisis.
Since trading volume in VIX futures and options is lower during the early life of these markets, the finding is somewhat surprising
given the role of liquidity in price discovery. Instead, the smaller margin requirements of the VIX futures relative to SPX options
appear to influence where new information is first reflected in prices. For the case of SPX futures and VIX futures, differences in
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
16
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table 5
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝐶.
𝐿𝐿𝐶𝑡 (1) (2)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
−0.754∗∗∗ −0.483∗∗∗
(−16.31) ( −12.15)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
−0.520∗∗∗
(−5.80)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.044
(−1.18)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
−0.012
(−0.70)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.006
(−0.54)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
0.011
(0.44)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
−0.031
(−0.96)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 56.84 76.43
No. of Obs. 773 773
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝐶 on a set of
explanatory variables for the subsample of days where the VIX index is above
its 60% percentile. 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡 denotes the peak cross-market trading between VIX
futures and SPX futures. 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is
the return of the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡 are dummy variables
equal to one on days with U.S. macroeconomic news and FOMC announcements,
respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡 (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the number of days to expiry of the
VIX futures (SPX futures) contract. All variables have been standardized by
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West 𝑡-
statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates 1%, 5%, and 10% significance
levels, respectively.
Fig. 10. The liquidity of VIX futures relative to the liquidity of SPX futures. The relative liquidity is computed as the Amihud illiquidity of SPX futures relative
to the Amihud illiquidity of VIX futures. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60% upper quantile.
both liquidity and margin requirements would still work in favor of an SPX futures leadership. However, the return characteristics
of the two futures contracts are very different. In general, the absolute returns of the SPX futures are much smaller in magnitude
than the VIX futures returns. An investor anticipating a future stock market decline could prefer to express this in the VIX futures
market due to the expected extreme reaction of the VIX futures price. In this sense, a position in a VIX futures has similarities to a
geared position in an SPX futures.
4.5.2. VIX futures hedging
While the discussion in Section 4.5.1 relates to the price discovery process, this section and Section 4.5.3 are not necessarily
concerned with factors determining where new information is first incorporated into prices. Instead, the focus is on hedging
transactions that can change the way that VIX futures and SPX futures are connected. We next look at how VIX futures hedging
by dealers creates a potential link between the two futures markets, as VIX futures dealers can hedge by trading SPX futures. The
observation that hedging activities can impact the lead–lag relation between two markets if market makers in one market trade in
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
17
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 11. Illustration of cross-market activity function.
the other market to hedge is not new. Option dealers setting up delta hedges is an important example of this Easley et al. (1998),
Chan et al. (2002), Schlag and Stoll (2005), Hu (2014).
When market participants want to trade VIX futures, typically, major dealers in financial markets take the other side of the trade.
Market makers and dealers are subject to strict risk requirements and profit from their flow of transactions and not from risk-taking.
In order to hedge their positions in volatility, dealers can utilize the strong negative correlation between VIX futures and SPX futures
prices. In this case, a short (long) VIX futures position of the dealer is hedged by selling (buying) SPX futures.
The hedging activities imply that once VIX futures dealers experience a change in their net position, they then trade in the SPX
futures market to set up the hedge. Hence, the hedging transactions have the potential to impact the lead–lag relation between VIX
futures and SPX futures. Since the hedging strategy implies that a VIX futures trade is followed by SPX futures trading, it works in
favor of a VIX futures leadership. Therefore, we expect that greater levels of hedging activity would strengthen the lead of the VIX
futures as measured by lower levels of𝐿𝐿𝑅 and𝐿𝐿𝑇 . However, the greater alignment of VIX futures and SPX futures prices induced
by the hedging activities will push 𝐿𝐿𝑇 towards zero from below. In addition, the price impact from the trades will contribute to
the negative correlation between VIX futures and SPX futures prices. This means that greater hedging activity could eventually cause
a larger negative correlation between the two futures prices, pushing down the value of 𝐿𝐿𝐶.
In order to analyze how VIX futures hedging activities influence the lead–lag relation, we want to measure the extent of such
activities. Generally, cross-market trading between two markets emerges from situations where trading in one market would generate
trading in the other market. This makes the VIX futures hedging activity a potential source for cross-market trading between VIX
futures and SPX futures. To proxy the part of the trading activity related to cross-market trading, we use the cross-market activity
measure introduced by Dobrev and Schaumburg (2018). Based on high-frequency data, the idea behind the measure is to identify
all so-called active timestamps. A timestamp is active if the specified activity takes place at that timestamp. In our case, the relevant
activity is trading. The total number of timestamps with simultaneous activity is then summed over the trading day and shows how
often both markets are active at the same time. Assuming that 𝜗 = 0, this number can be obtained as:
𝑋𝑟𝑎𝑤
𝜗 =
𝑁−|𝜗|∑
𝑖=|𝜗|+1
1{market 𝐴 active in period 𝑖}∩{market 𝐵 active in period 𝑖−𝜗}, (4)
where 𝑁 is the total number of timestamps. With data at millisecond frequency, 𝑁 is the total number of milliseconds over the
trading day. The number of cross-active timestamps can be scaled by the total number of active timestamps in the least active market
to measure cross-market activity as a proportion of the total activity
𝑋𝑟𝑒𝑙
𝜗 =
𝑋𝑟𝑎𝑤
𝜗
min
{∑𝑁−|𝜗|
𝑖=|𝜗|+1 1{market 𝐴 active in period 𝑖},∑𝑁−|𝜗|
𝑖=|𝜗|+1 1{market 𝐵 active in period 𝑖−𝜗}
}. (5)
In order to only capture the activity with a cross-market dimension, a further adjustment is implemented to account for the
simultaneous activity that would occur simply by randomness. This gives the cross-market activity in excess of what would be
expected by coincidence, given that activity in the two markets is independent of each other. It is defined as:
𝑋𝜗 =𝑋𝑟𝑒𝑙
𝜗 −𝑋𝑟𝑒𝑙
∞, (6)
where the adjustment term is given by𝑋𝑟𝑒𝑙
∞ = 1∕(2(𝑇2 −𝑇1
))∑𝑇2
|𝜗|=𝑇1+1𝑋𝑟𝑒𝑙
𝜗 for sufficiently large𝑇2 >𝑇 1. In addition to simultaneous
activity where 𝜗 = 0 , timestamps are shifted forward and backward in time when considering non-zero values of 𝜗. For a set of
different values of𝜗, a full curve for the proportion of cross-market activity can be obtained. We illustrate this in Fig. 11, and denote
the value of the timestamp shift, 𝜗, corresponding to the maximum of the curve by the cross-market activity time ( 𝐶𝑀𝐴𝑇 ), while
the peak cross-market activity (𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 ) is the value of the cross-market activity, 𝑋𝜗, at the point.
For each sample date, our measure of cross-market trading is𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 . For the implementation of the measure, we use a time-shift,
𝜗, within [−1000, 1000] milliseconds where increments are of one millisecond and with 𝑇1 = 500 and 𝑇2 = 1000 , as in Dobrev and
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
18
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 12. Peak cross-market trading for VIX futures and SPX futures. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60% upper quantile.
Schaumburg (2018). In Fig. 12, we plot the peak cross-market trading variable, 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡, over the sample period. We see a clear
connection between the proportion of trading related to cross-market activity and the level of the VIX index as 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 increases
during periods of high VIX, as indicated by the shaded areas. 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 reaches its highest level at the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic.
Table 3 shows the regression results from regressing 𝐿𝐿𝑅 on𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 . Since cross-market trading can arise from hedging by VIX
futures dealers, the strong significance of the cross-market trading coefficient in columns (5)–(6) suggests that VIX futures hedging
influences the lead–lag relation and pushes the markets in the direction of a VIX futures leadership. 2 The relation between cross-
market trading and 𝐿𝐿𝐶 is shown in Table 5. We see that when cross-market trading increases, the negative correlation between
VIX futures and SPX futures returns gets more pronounced. With investors buying (selling) VIX futures and VIX futures dealers
hedging in response to this by selling (buying) SPX futures, the hedging mechanism can create a greater negative correlation. To
the extent that hedging activities are reflected in cross-market trading, this can explain why a greater proportion of cross-market
trading pushes down the value of 𝐿𝐿𝐶.
It is uncertain to which extent cross-market activity is driven by VIX futures hedging activities. Alternatively, it could arise
from high-frequency traders exploiting the relation between equity markets and volatility. Once the SPX futures price moves, these
traders may have strategies in place for how to trade in the VIX futures market and vice versa. In particular, these types of strategies
could be used in the high-VIX periods where the two futures markets are more negatively correlated, as documented in Section 4.2 .
In line with this, Zhang ( 2010), Dobrev and Schaumburg ( 2018), and Buccheri et al. ( 2021) argue that the relation between high-
volatility and lead–lag relation can be ascribed to high-frequency traders exploiting statistical dependencies across markets appearing
when volatility is high. Other studies show that profitable trading opportunities tend to occur more often under high volatility. For
instance, Marshall et al. ( 2013) and Budish et al. ( 2015) show that arbitrage opportunities between the two ETFs, IVV and SPY,
and between SPX futures and SPY, respectively, are more frequent under high volatility. Although the VIX futures and SPX futures
are not characterized by the same no-arbitrage relation, mislocations of prices and short-lived correlations, which create profitable
trading opportunities for high-frequency traders, are expected to be more frequent as volatility increases. Based on this reasoning,
the proportion of cross-market trading during high-VIX periods would be higher due to an increased presence of high-frequency
traders exploiting the stronger connection between the two futures prices. This also fits with the pattern in Fig. 12 , as days with
the VIX index belonging to the upper 60% quantile seem to be characterized by a high level of 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 . Empirically, the correlation
between 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 and VIX equals 0.67.
Even if cross-market activity captures high-frequency trading activity rather than VIX futures hedging activity, it can still help
explain the negative relation between 𝐿𝐿𝐶 and 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 shown in Table 5. This is the case under a feedback effect from the high-
frequency trading. Besides attracting high-frequency traders, the negative correlation between the VIX futures and SPX futures
prices could be further strengthened by the increased activity of high-frequency traders. Specifically, if their trading strategies
are built to exploit the negative correlation between the two futures prices, their trading could push down the correlation even
more. The presence of high-frequency trading then amplifies the magnitude of 𝐿𝐿𝐶 and thereby also influences 𝐿𝐿𝑅, resulting
in a strengthening of an existing leadership. Since our results indicate that high VIX periods are characterized by a VIX futures
leadership, this means that the negative correlation between 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and cross-market trading observed in Table 3 could arise from
the more active high-frequency traders in those periods.
2 In principle, the activity related to the hedging of VIX futures is only consistent with the part of the cross-market trading where the VIX futures trades
lead the SPX futures trades. However, as noted by Dobrev and Schaumburg ( 2018), the estimation of the location of the peak cross-market trading is often
unreliable, while the proportion of cross-market trading is much easier to estimate reliably. Thus, we do not make any distinction in whether the cross-market
trading on a given day occurs at an offset where VIX futures trades lead SPX futures trades or the reverse.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
19
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. 13. SPX option dealer net gamma position. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60% upper quantile.
4.5.3. Option rebalancing
Option dealers typically hedge their exposure by trading the underlying of the option. Whenever the price of the underlying
changes, proper risk management implies that the hedge positions are updated. In general, option dealers with a negative gamma
position rebalance their delta hedge in the direction of the market movements of the underlying, while a positive net gamma position
involves trading against the market movements (Ni et al., 2021). This means that when the aggregate net gamma position of option
dealers is negative, there is a risk of amplifying market movements in the underlying. Such amplification has been documented
empirically for various markets on which options are written, including the SPX futures ( Baltussen et al., 2021).
We now detail how SPX option dealers’ updating delta hedges can impact the lead–lag relation between VIX futures and SPX
futures. As is the case for the average sample date, we assume that new information is first incorporated into the VIX futures market.
Consider the situation where the new information results in a positive VIX futures return. Under the negative correlation and VIX
futures leadership, this predicts a subsequent negative SPX futures return. Option dealers with a negative gamma position then
rebalance in response to the negative SPX futures price movement by selling SPX futures, resulting in further downward pressure
on the SPX futures price. As long as the net gamma position is negative, the same holds but with opposite signs if the initial VIX
futures return is negative. Thus, the negative net gamma position is an amplifier of the SPX futures price movement. Days where
the aggregate net gamma position among dealers is negative could therefore result in an even stronger VIX futures leadership as the
initial VIX futures price movement continues to impact the SPX futures over a longer time due to the option rebalancing. In terms
of the cross-correlation function, this would produce a stronger asymmetry as we would have a slower decay of the curve for the
negative timeshifts. Based on this, we expect that the value of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 would be reduced as a result of dealers updating their delta
hedges under a negative gamma position. The more negative the net gamma position, the stronger this effect should be, as a more
negative net gamma position requires dealers to trade more in the SPX futures market for a given change in the SPX futures price.
While we expect that the hedging activities impact𝐿𝐿𝑅, the value of𝐿𝐿𝑇 should not be influenced as the location of the peak of the
cross-correlation function should be unaffected. On days where dealers hold a positive net gamma position, the option rebalancing
should not induce the same long-lasting impact of a given VIX futures price change as dealers trade in the opposite direction of the
SPX futures price movement. Given that the average/median sample date is characterized by a VIX futures leadership in terms of
𝐿𝐿𝑇 , we therefore expect that a negative net gamma position could amplify the VIX futures leadership as measured by 𝐿𝐿𝑅.
In order to analyze the impact of the net gamma position, we estimate the daily aggregate net gamma position of option dealers.
This is done using SPX options data from OptionMetrics and making some assumptions. We first assume that end-user demand is
long in put options and short in call options. This claim is empirically justified by Garleanu et al. ( 2008) and Goyenko and Zhang
(2019). Second, we assume that the dealer is the counterparty in all option trades, and finally, that the dealers delta hedge their
entire exposure. Similar to Baltussen et al. (2021), we use these assumptions to construct our proxy for the net gamma position at
time 𝑡 as:
𝑁𝐺𝑃𝑡 =
𝑁𝐶
𝑡∑
𝑖=1
𝛤𝐵𝑆
𝑡 (𝐶𝑖)𝑂𝐼𝑡(𝐶𝑖) −
𝑁𝑃
𝑡∑
𝑖=1
𝛤𝐵𝑆
𝑡 (𝑃𝑖)𝑂𝐼𝑡(𝑃𝑖), (7)
where𝑁𝐶
𝑡 is the number of call options traded at time 𝑡 with an open interest greater than zero.𝛤𝐵𝑆
𝑡 (𝐶𝑖) denotes the Black–Scholes
gamma of call option 𝑖, and 𝑂𝐼𝑡(𝐶𝑖) is the option’s open interest. Similar notation holds for put options.
Fig. 13 depicts the estimated net gamma position throughout our sample period. The gamma of the option position fluctuates
around zero. However, when markets are in turmoil, as measured by a high level of the VIX index, the position is mostly negative
and can move rapidly from positive to negative when market volatility increases.
Due to the different expectations about the impact of a positive and negative net gamma position, we decompose the series into
two variables:𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 = max{0,𝑁𝐺𝑃 𝑡
}, collecting all the days where the position is positive, and𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 = min{0,𝑁𝐺𝑃 𝑡
}, composed
of all the days where the net gamma position is negative. The relation between 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and these two variables is shown in columns
(7) and (8) of Table 3. As expected, we see that a decrease in the gamma position when it is already negative (the 𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 variable)
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
20
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
is associated with a decrease in 𝐿𝐿𝑅. This is equivalent to a strengthening of the VIX futures lead. The more negative the gamma
position, the more heavily option dealers will need to trade in the direction of a given SPX futures price change. This could create
a prolonged impact of any SPX futures price change originating from movements in the VIX futures price. Hence, our regression
results are consistent with option rebalancing generating a slower decay of the left tail of the cross-correlation function, which will
work to reduce 𝐿𝐿𝑅. Table 3 further shows that changes in the gamma position when it is positive (the 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 variable) do not
significantly influence𝐿𝐿𝑅. However, this conclusion is not robust to the regression being run on the full sample (Table A.2). In the
latter case, the𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 variable has a positive impact on𝐿𝐿𝑅. When we focus on𝐿𝐿𝑇 , Table 4 reveals that the estimated coefficient
for 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 is negative and statistically significant at a 5% level in both the regressions involving this variable, such that a positive
change to an already positive net gamma position has a negative impact on 𝐿𝐿𝑇 . However, this effect considerably weakens when
the regression is run on the full sample (Table A.3). Hence, the overall evidence related to the 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 variable is mixed and more
difficult to interpret as related to option rebalancing activity.
5. Conclusion
We study the lead–lag relation between VIX futures and SPX futures using high-frequency trade data from January 2013 to
September 2020. For each day, we estimate the cross-correlation function and extract various measures of the lead–lag relation. The
analysis reveals a large time variation in the lead–lag relation. Under low volatility, the lead–lag measures should be interpreted
with caution as the two markets are not strongly connected. During periods of high volatility, returns exhibit a stronger negative
correlation and a short-lived lead–lag with a tendency for VIX futures to lead SPX futures. The VIX futures leadership confirms the
important role played by the VIX futures across the various SPX-related markets.
In order to analyze the economic significance of the lead–lag relation, we consider two simple strategies that trade either VIX
futures or SPX futures after observing a price change in the other market. For the majority of the sample, the average daily returns
of both trading strategies are positive when trades are assumed to take place at midquotes. However, under a more realistic setup
where trades are executed at bid and ask prices, the lead–lag relation can no longer be monetized. Hence, the two markets are too
synchronized for the lead–lag relation to be traded with a profit.
An analysis of the potential determinants of the lead–lag relation indicates that an improvement in the relative liquidity of one
market strengthens the lead of that market. Since investors can express their view on future market movements or buy protection
against downside risk using both VIX futures and SPX futures, we interpret the results as support of our conjecture that the relative
liquidity influences the price discovery process. Moreover, we find that an increase in the proportion of cross-market trading is
associated with a strengthened VIX futures lead. Since VIX futures dealers can hedge their VIX futures position through a position in
SPX futures, their hedging strategy would involve trading SPX futures after providing liquidity in the VIX futures market. Thereby,
the hedging activities could contribute to the level of cross-market activity. Hence, it is possible that hedging activities of VIX futures
dealers are driving a part of the VIX futures lead over SPX futures. Finally, our analysis suggests that when market makers in SPX
options are in an aggregate negative gamma position, a further increase in the imbalance of the gamma position could lead to a
stronger VIX futures lead in terms of 𝐿𝐿𝑅.
Appendix. Supplementary figures and tables
See Tables A.1–A.6 and Figs. A.1–A.3.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
21
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table A.1
Descriptive statistics of the overnight lead–lag measures.
Full sample VIX upper quartile
(pre-COVID-19)
COVID-19 period
𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶 𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶 𝐿𝐿𝑅 𝐿𝐿𝑇 𝐿𝐿𝐶
Mean 0.901 −1.268 −0.165 0.856 0.133 −0.236 0.781 −0.000 −0.403
Std. dev. 0.515 16.427 0.115 0.402 7.775 0.096 0.123 0.113 0.103
Min 0.151 −60.000 −0.632 0.504 −56.400 −0.502 0.547 −0.920 −0.632
Lower quartile 0.669 −1.200 −0.222 0.692 −0.056 −0.304 0.705 0.003 −0.478
Median 0.783 −0.006 −0.130 0.771 −0.002 −0.232 0.767 0.019 −0.403
Upper quartile 0.971 0.035 −0.083 0.901 0.022 −0.168 0.835 0.030 −0.333
Max 7.801 60.000 0.120 6.410 59.900 −0.051 1.688 0.180 −0.106
Overnight always ends at 9:30 EST on day 𝑡 and, depending on the sample date, begins at either 8:00 or 3:00 on day 𝑡, or 18:00
on day 𝑡 − 1. All numbers are shown for the full sample, a subsample of high VIX days excluding the COVID-19 pandemic, and
a subsample containing all days after the outbreak of the pandemic. The COVID-19 period covers all sample days after February
20, 2020. The pre-COVID-19 high VIX subsample first excludes all days after the COVID-19 cutoff date and then includes only
the days where the level of the VIX index is above its upper quartile. 𝐿𝐿𝑇 is measured in seconds.
Table A.2
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 (full sample).
𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑡 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
−0.137∗∗ −0.103
(−2.43) ( −1.54)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
−0.034 −0.071∗
(−0.98) ( −1.96)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
−0.291∗∗∗ −0.386∗∗∗
(−9.01) ( −10.00)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡
0.164∗∗∗ 0.162∗∗∗
(4.49) (4.18)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡
0.084∗∗∗ 0.089∗∗∗
(4.10) (4.30)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
−0.043 −0.143∗∗∗ 0.133∗∗∗ −0.014
(−1.18) ( −3.52) (5.25) ( −0.65)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.003 −0.010 −0.017 −0.034∗∗
(−0.23) ( −0.69) ( −1.10) ( −2.01)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
0.022 0.019 0.021 0.016
(0.97) (0.88) (0.99) (0.72)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.054∗∗∗ −0.055∗∗∗ −0.027∗ −0.058∗∗∗
(−3.14) ( −3.20) ( −1.65) ( −3.45)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
−0.013 −0.024 −0.043∗ −0.018
(−0.53) ( −0.96) ( −1.84) ( −0.73)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
0.000 −0.000 −0.032 −0.002
(0.01) ( −0.01) ( −1.20) ( −0.06)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 1.82 1.90 0.06 1.96 8.42 9.49 4.74 4.94
No. of Obs. 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝑅 on a set of explanatory variables for the full sample of
observations. The explanatory variables are the relative liquidity of VIX futures and SPX futures measured using the Amihud
measure, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , and relative trading volume, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 , the peak cross-market trading between VIX futures and SPX futures,
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡, and the aggregate SPX option net gamma position of dealers for days where it is positive, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 , and for days where
it is negative, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 . 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is the return of the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
are dummy variables equal to one on days with U.S. macroeconomic news and FOMC announcements, respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
(𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the number of days to expiry of the VIX futures (SPX futures) contract. All variables have been standardized
by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West 𝑡-statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates
1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
22
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table A.3
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 (full sample).
𝐿𝐿𝑇𝑡 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
0.033∗ 0.005
(1.75) (0.21)
𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
−0.028 −0.019
(−0.96) ( −0.61)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
0.042∗ 0.031
(1.78) (1.21)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡
−0.068∗ −0.065
(−1.74) ( −1.62)
𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡
0.008 0.013
(0.65) (1.13)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
0.034 0.033 ∗ 0.017 0.012
(1.60) (1.86) (1.12) (1.12)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.007 −0.009 −0.006 −0.004
(−0.74) ( −0.91) ( −0.63) ( −0.39)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
0.011 0.011 0.011 0.013
(0.52) (0.49) (0.52) (0.59)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
0.020 0.020 0.018 0.021
(1.56) (1.55) (1.40) (1.59)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
0.028 0.026 0.030 0.030
(1.43) (1.22) (1.54) (1.53)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
0.009 0.012 0.011 0.008
(0.34) (0.46) (0.43) (0.30)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 0.06 −0.07 0.03 −0.03 0.12 −0.01 0.30 0.17
No. of Obs. 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝑇 on a set of explanatory variables for the full sample of
observations. The explanatory variables are the relative liquidity of VIX futures and SPX futures measured using the Amihud
measure, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 , and relative trading volume, 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 , the peak cross-market trading between VIX futures and SPX futures,
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡, and the aggregate SPX option net gamma position of dealers for days where it is positive, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 +
𝑡 , and for days where
it is negative, 𝑁𝐺𝑃 −
𝑡 . 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is the return of the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
are dummy variables equal to one on days with U.S. macroeconomic news and FOMC announcements, respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
(𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the number of days to expiry of the VIX futures (SPX futures) contract. All variables have been standardized
by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West 𝑡-statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates
1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
Table A.4
The determinants of 𝐿𝐿𝐶 (full sample).
𝐿𝐿𝐶𝑡 (1) (2)
𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡
−0.838∗∗∗ −0.492∗∗∗
(−21.51) ( −11.94)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
−0.520∗∗∗
(−6.76)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.022
(−0.75)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
−0.003
(−0.30)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.013∗∗
(−1.98)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
0.005
(0.40)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
−0.013
(−0.79)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 70.25 85.01
No. of Obs. 1933 1933
The table shows the results from regressing daily values of 𝐿𝐿𝐶 on a set of explanatory variables
for the full sample of observations. 𝑃𝐶𝑀𝐴 𝑡 denotes the peak cross-market trading between
VIX futures and SPX futures. 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡 is the level of the VIX index, and 𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡 is the return of
the SPX index on day 𝑡. 𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡 and 𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡 are dummy variables equal to one on days with U.S.
macroeconomic news and FOMC announcements, respectively. 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡 (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡 ) denotes the
number of days to expiry of the VIX futures (SPX futures) contract. All variables have been
standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Newey–West
𝑡-statistics are in parentheses. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ indicates 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
23
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Table A.5
The inverse of the liquidity ratio (high VIX subsample).
𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑡 𝐿𝐿𝑇𝑡
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
(𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
)−1 0.212∗∗∗ 0.244∗∗∗ −0.058∗ −0.064
(3.55) (3.62) ( −1.65) ( −1.32)
(𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
)−1 0.047 0.122 ∗∗ 0.042 0.025
(1.10) (2.20) (1.50) (1.64)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
0.039 −0.101 0.028 ∗∗ 0.043∗
(0.80) ( −1.64) (1.96) (1.70)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.002 −0.018 0.002 −0.005
(−0.06) ( −0.57) (0.16) ( −0.48)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
0.005 0.002 −0.078 −0.075
(0.16) (0.07) ( −1.05) ( −1.03)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.069∗∗ −0.069∗∗ 0.022∗ 0.022∗
(−2.24) ( −2.09) (1.72) (1.69)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
−0.153∗∗∗ −0.172∗∗∗ −0.007 −0.016
(−3.47) ( −3.48) ( −0.47) ( −1.18)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
0.032 0.007 −0.076 −0.062
(0.60) (0.12) ( −1.15) ( −1.08)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 4.37 6.55 0.09 2.89 0.21 0.68 0.04 0.40
No. of Obs. 773 773 773 773 773 773 773 773
The table shows the regression results for 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 using the liquidity of SPX futures relative to the liquidity of VIX futures
as explanatory variable for the subsample of days where the VIX index is above its 60% percentile. Relative to Tables 3 and 4,
the inverse of 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 and 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 are applied here.
Table A.6
The inverse liquidity ratio (full sample).
𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑡 𝐿𝐿𝑇𝑡
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
(𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡
)−1 0.144∗∗∗ 0.113∗∗∗ −0.043 −0.031
(4.49) (3.43) ( −1.42) ( −0.98)
(𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡
)−1 0.077∗∗ 0.129∗∗∗ 0.034 0.023
(2.06) (3.25) (1.38) (0.86)
𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝑡
−0.082∗∗ −0.163∗∗∗ 0.026 0.031 ∗
(−2.52) ( −3.76) (1.53) (1.68)
𝑆𝑃𝑋𝑡
−0.003 −0.018 −0.007 −0.010
(−0.20) ( −1.20) ( −0.73) ( −1.02)
𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑤𝑠
𝑡
0.019 0.019 0.012 0.011
(0.86) (0.88) (0.55) (0.50)
𝑑𝑓𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑡
−0.054∗∗∗ −0.052∗∗∗ 0.020 0.021
(−3.25) ( −3.05) (1.56) (1.59)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝑉𝑋
𝑡
−0.005 −0.041∗ 0.025 0.023
(−0.18) ( −1.67) (1.31) (1.06)
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑦𝐸𝑆
𝑡
−0.004 0.008 0.008 0.012
(−0.15) (0.27) (0.32) (0.50)
Adj. 𝑅2 (%) 2.01 2.59 0.54 2.93 0.14 0.02 0.06 −0.02
No. of Obs. 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933 1933
The table shows the regression results for 𝐿𝐿𝑅 and 𝐿𝐿𝑇 using the liquidity of SPX futures relative to the liquidity of VIX futures
as explanatory variable for the full sample of observations. Relative to Tables 3 and 4, the inverse of 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝐴𝑀𝐻
𝑡 and 𝐿𝑄𝑅𝑉𝑜𝑙
𝑡 are
applied here.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
24
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. A.1. The overnight lead–lag measures and the VIX and the SPX over the sample period. Overnight always ends at 9:30 EST on day 𝑡 and depending on
the sample date begins at either 8:00 or 3:00 on day 𝑡, or 18:00 on day 𝑡 − 1. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60%
upper quantile.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
25
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
Fig. A.2. Average return of the trading strategy in VIX futures for each sample date. The strategy takes long (short) VIX futures position after each decrease
(increase) in the SPX futures trading price. Trading is assumed to take place at bid or ask prices (solid line, left scale) and midquotes (dashed line, right scale)
the millisecond following the VIX futures price change. The holding period varies across the plots at values of five milliseconds, one second, one minute, and
five minutes. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to its 60% upper quantile.
Fig. A.3. Relative liquidity of VIX futures and SPX futures measured by trading volume. The shaded areas correspond to days where the VIX index belongs to
its 60% upper quantile.
Journal of Financial Markets 67 (2024) 100851
26
C. Bangsgaard and T. Kokholm
References
Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. J. Financial Markets 5 (1), 31–56.
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., 2007. Real-time price discovery in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. J. Int. Econ. 73 (2),
251–277.
Baltussen, G., Da, Z., Lammers, S., Martens, M., 2021. Hedging demand and market intraday momentum. J. Financial Econ. 142 (1), 377–403.
Bangsgaard, C., Kokholm, T., 2023. The stock market impact of volatility hedging: Evidence from end-of-day trading by VIX ETPs. Available at SSRN 4470636.
Barclay, M.J., Hendershott, T., 2003. Price discovery and trading after hours. Rev. Financial Stud. 16 (4), 1041–1073.
Barras, L., Malkhozov, A., 2016. Does variance risk have two prices? Evidence from the equity and option markets. J. Financial Econ. 121 (1), 79–92.
Bekaert, G., Wu, G., 2000. Asymmetric volatility and risk in equity markets. Rev. Financial Stud. 13 (1), 1–42.
Bollen, N.P., O’Neill, M.J., Whaley, R.E., 2017. Tail wags dog: Intraday price discovery in VIX markets. J. Futures Markets 37 (5), 431–451.
Bollerslev, T., Litvinova, J., Tauchen, G., 2006. Leverage and volatility feedback effects in high-frequency data. J. Financial Econ. 4 (3), 353–384.
Bollerslev, T., Sizova, N., Tauchen, G., 2012. Volatility in equilibrium: Asymmetries and dynamic dependencies. Rev. Finance 16 (1), 31–80.
Bonanno, G., Lillo, F., Mantegna, R., 2001. High-frequency cross-correlation in a set of stocks. Quant. Finance 1 (1), 96–104.
Bondarenko, O., Muravyev, D., 2023. Market return around the clock: A puzzle. J. Financial and Quant. Anal. 58 (3), 939–967.
Buccheri, G., Corsi, F., Peluso, S., 2021. High-frequency lead–lag effects and cross-asset linkages: A multi-asset lagged adjustment model. J. Bus. Econom. Statist.
39 (3), 605–621.
Buckle, M., Chen, J., Guo, Q., Tong, C., 2018. Do ETFs lead the price moves? Evidence from the major US markets. Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 58, 91–103.
Budish, E., Cramton, P., Shim, J., 2015. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. Quart. J. Econ. 130 (4),
1547–1621.
Carr, P., Wu, L., 2006. A tale of two indices. J Derivat. 13 (3), 13–29.
Chan, K., Chung, Y.P., Fong, W.-M., 2002. The informational role of stock and option volume. Rev. Financial Studi. 15 (4), 1049–1075.
Chen, W.-P., Chung, H., Lien, D., 2016. Price discovery in the S&P 500 index derivatives markets. Int. Rev. Econ. Finance 45, 438–452.
Chen, Y.-L., Tsai, W.-C., 2017. Determinants of price discovery in the VIX futures market. J. Empirical Finance 43, 59–73.
Cheng, I.-H., 2019. The VIX premium. Rev.F Financial Stud. 32 (1), 180–227.
Cheng, I.-H, 2020. Volatility markets underreacted to the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 10 (4), 635–668.
Connolly, R., Stivers, C., Sun, L., 2005. Stock market uncertainty and the stock-bond return relation. J. Financial Quantitative Anal. 40 (1), 161–194.
Cont, R., Kokholm, T., 2013. A consistent pricing model for index options and volatility derivatives. Math. Finance 23 (2), 248–274.
Dao, T.M., McGroarty, F., Urquhart, A., 2018. Ultra-high-frequency lead–lag relationship and information arrival. Quant. Finance 18 (5), 725–735.
Dobrev, D., Schaumburg, E., 2018. High-Frequency Cross-Market Trading: Model Free Measurement and Applications. Working paper, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, Washington, DC.
Dufour, J.-M., Garcia, R., Taamouti, A., 2012. Measuring high-frequency causality between returns, realized volatility, and implied volatility. J. Financial Econ.
10 (1), 124–163.
Easley, D., O’Hara, M., Srinivas, P.S., 1998. Option volume and stock prices: Evidence on where informed traders trade. J. Finance 53 (2), 431–465.
Epps, T.W., 74, 1979. Comovements in stock prices in the very short run. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. (366a), 291–298.
Fleming, J., Kirby, C., Ostdiek, B., 1998. Information and volatility linkages in the stock, bond, and money markets. J. Financial Econ. 49 (1), 111–137.
Frijns, B., Indriawan, I., Tourani-Rad, A., 2018. The interactions between price discovery, liquidity and algorithmic trading for US-Canadian cross-listed shares.
Int. Rev. Financial Anal. 56, 136–152.
Frijns, B., Tourani-Rad, A., Webb, R.I., 2016. On the intraday relation between the VIX and its futures. J. Futures Markets 36 (9), 870–886.
Frino, A., Walter, T., West, A., 2000. The lead–lag relationship between equities and stock index futures markets around information releases. J. Futures Markets
20 (5), 467–487.
Garleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., Poteshman, A.M., 2008. Demand-based option pricing. Rev. Financial Stud. 22 (10), 4259–4299.
Gonzalo, J., Granger, C., 1995. Estimation of common long-memory components in cointegrated systems. J. Bus. Econ. Statist. 13 (1), 27–35.
Goyenko, R., Zhang, C., 2019. Demand pressures and option returns. Available at SSRN 3489347.
Green, R.C., Li, D., Schürhoff, N., 2010. Price discovery in illiquid markets: Do financial asset prices rise faster than they fall? J. Finance 65 (5), 1669–1702.
Hasbrouck, J., 1995. One security, many markets: Determining the contributions to price discovery. J. Finance 50 (4), 1175–1199.
Hasbrouck, J., 2003. Intraday price formation in US equity index markets. J. Finance 58 (6), 2375–2400.
Hayashi, T., Yoshida, N., 2005. On covariance estimation of non-synchronously observed diffusion processes. Bernoulli 11 (2), 359–379.
Hilal, S., Poon, S.-H., Tawn, J., 2011. Hedging the black swan: Conditional heteroskedasticity and tail dependence in S&P 500 and VIX. J. Banking Finance 35
(9), 2374–2387.
Hoffmann, M., Rosenbaum, M., Yoshida, N., 2013. Estimation of the lead–lag parameter from non-synchronous data. Bernoulli 19 (2), 426–461.
Hu, J., 2014. Does option trading convey stock price information? J. Financial Econ. 111 (3), 625–645.
Hu, G.X., Pan, J., Wang, J., Zhu, H., 2022. Premium for heightened uncertainty: Explaining pre-announcement market returns. J. Financial Econ. 145 (3),
909–936.
Huth, N., Abergel, F., 2014. High frequency lead/lag relationships-empirical facts. J. Empirical Finance 26, 41–58.
Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53 (6), 1315–1335.
Lee, H.-C., Liao, T.-H., Tung, P.-Y., 2017. Investors’ heterogeneity in beliefs, the VIX futures basis, and S&P 500 index futures returns. J. Futures Markets 37
(9), 939–960.
Lochstoer, L.A., Muir, T., 2022. Volatility expectations and returns. J. Finance 77 (2), 1055–1096.
Marshall, B.R., Nguyen, N.H., Visaltanachoti, N., 2013. ETF arbitrage: Intraday evidence. J. Bank. Financ. 37 (9), 3486–3498.
Ni, S.X., Pearson, N.D., Poteshman, A.M., White, J., 2021. Does option trading have a pervasive impact on underlying stock prices? Rev. Financial Stud. 34 (4),
1952–1986.
Park, Y.-H., 2020. Variance disparity and market frictions. J. Econ. 214 (2), 326–348.
Ren, F., Ji, S.-D., Cai, M.-L., Li, S.-P., Jiang, X.-F., 2019. Dynamic lead–lag relationship between stock indices and their derivatives: A comparative study between
Chinese mainland, Hong Kong and US stock markets. Physica A 513, 709–723.
Schlag, C., Stoll, H., 2005. Price impacts of options volume. J. Financial Markets 8 (1), 69–87.
Shu, J., Zhang, J.E., 2012. Causality in the VIX futures market. J. Futures Markets 32 (1), 24–46.
Szado, E., 2009. VIX futures and options: A case study of portfolio diversification during the 2008 financial crisis. J. Alternative Invest. 12 (2), 68–85.
Todorov, V., Tauchen, G., 2011. Volatility jumps. J. Bus. Econ. Statist. 29 (3), 356–371.
Underwood, S., 2009. The cross-market information content of stock and bond order flow. J. Financial Markets 12 (2), 268–289.
Van Tassel, P., 2020. The Law of One Price in Equity Volatility Markets. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, no. 953.
Yang, A., 2022. Understanding negative risk-return trade-offs. Available at SSRN 4116731.
Zhang, F., 2010. High-frequency trading, stock volatility, and price discovery. Available at SSRN 1691679.